[Amit Varma]: Arthur C. Clarke once said, quote, any sufficiently advanced technology is indistinguishable from
[Amit Varma]: magic, stop quote. If someone from say 1981 travelled all the way to 2021, this world
[Amit Varma]: would look magical. I suppose every generation feels that the world has changed so much in
[Amit Varma]: its time. But this is more true of our generation than any other. Technology has made the pace
[Amit Varma]: of change almost exponential over the last few decades. A friend of mine once remarked
[Amit Varma]: that kids today may never know what it is to be lost, physically lost. All hail GPS
[Amit Varma]: and the internet. When I was a kid, we would struggle to get hold of books and films and
[Amit Varma]: music that we wanted. Our life was a series of lost counterfactuals, things we did not
[Amit Varma]: discover because we were in a bubble, journeys we could not take or even conceive of. All
[Amit Varma]: that has changed so much. And here in the second half of my 40s, I sometimes find myself
[Amit Varma]: taking this change for granted. What I would have found magical yesterday is commonplace
[Amit Varma]: today. And I think it makes sense to sometimes sit back and take stock. This is especially
[Amit Varma]: so in India, where so much has changed. And so much has also not changed. Some of the
[Amit Varma]: change is superficial, some of it is deep and fundamental. Our lives have changed, our
[Amit Varma]: society has changed, our politics has changed. And what better way to consider all of this
[Amit Varma]: than through the life of someone whose main preoccupation for more than 40 years has been
[Amit Varma]: to document and make sense of the present moment. There's a lot to learn from that journey.
[Unknown]: Welcome to the scene and the unseen, our weekly podcast on economics, politics and behavioral
[Amit Varma]: science. Please welcome your host, Amit Varma.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to the scene and the unseen. My guest today is Veer Sanghvi, one of the giants of
[Amit Varma]: Indian journalism. He became an editor in his 20s around 40 years ago and shaped what
[Amit Varma]: I thought was the finest news magazine of my growing up years called Sunday. He would
[Amit Varma]: go on to be a pioneer in Indian television as well. And he also edited the Hindustan
[Amit Varma]: Times for a few years and brought it kicking and screaming into the 21st century. He can
[Amit Varma]: write about food, politics and society with equal ease. But in all these years, his gaze
[Amit Varma]: has mostly gone outwards. Until now. Veer has just come out with a memoir called A Rude
[Amit Varma]: Life and I love reading it. I've admired his clear lucid prose since the early 1990s. But
[Amit Varma]: the one thing that surprised me about this book is the humor. It's sharp, witty and self-reflective
[Amit Varma]: and I found myself laughing out loud throughout the book. But this book does much more than
[Amit Varma]: just make us laugh. It also gives us a sense of the times and is especially acute when
[Amit Varma]: it comes to understanding Indian politics. I loved having this conversation. But before
[Amit Varma]: we get to it, let's take a quick commercial break.
[Amit Varma]: How well do I know myself? Not as well as I used to think I do. We sometimes realize
[Amit Varma]: the extent to which other people are a mystery to us. But we underestimate how much we are
[Amit Varma]: a mystery to ourselves. We often imagine that we are blank slates. But that's not true.
[Amit Varma]: We are shaped and constrained by our genes. And understanding the way we are wired can
[Amit Varma]: help us make the most of them. And one way towards this self-knowledge comes from the
[Amit Varma]: sponsors of this episode, MapMyGenome. 20 years ago, sequencing your genome could cost
[Amit Varma]: around $20 million. Today, MapMyGenome can sequence your genes and give you a genome
[Amit Varma]: number 3, as it were, for just a few thousand rupees. You only need to get tested once,
[Amit Varma]: and they give you an intimate understanding of the way you are wired. This helps you in
[Amit Varma]: a number of ways. It tells you which diseases you are predisposed to, so you can take steps
[Amit Varma]: to avoid them. It helps you understand what kind of nutrition is right for you. It helps
[Amit Varma]: you understand what kind of sporting activities are right for you. Are you built for power
[Amit Varma]: or for speed? I'm definitely going to use their services because the key to making the
[Amit Varma]: most of yourself is to first know yourself. So do head on over to MapMyGenome.in and check
[Amit Varma]: out their products. You will get a 50% discount on Genome Patri if you use my discount code
[Amit Varma]: UNSEEN. That's right. For 50% off, use the discount code UNSEEN at MapMyGenome.in. Know
[Amit Varma]: yourself.
[Amit Varma]: We are welcome to the scene and the unseen. Thank you. It's a pleasure to be here.
[Amit Varma]: So you know, before we start talking about your book and about your life, and your book
[Amit Varma]: is about your life. So in a sense, they're kind of the same thing. Tell me a little bit
[Amit Varma]: about how the last few months have been for you, because you're someone who travels a
[Amit Varma]: lot, who likes to, you know, go out, meet people. Sometimes your work requires that
[Amit Varma]: in terms of your shows or your journalism. You go to a lot of restaurants, as we know.
[Amit Varma]: So how have the last few months in COVID been for you? And, you know, are there things that
[Amit Varma]: they've made you kind of rethink and look at and so on?
[Guest]: Yeah, you know, Amit, they've actually not been great for me. They've not been great,
[Guest]: I think, for anyone. But like the first few months of COVID, which was March last year,
[Guest]: we didn't do anything, my wife and I, we just stayed at home. And then when that first wave
[Guest]: appeared to recede slightly, we said to ourselves that this is not good for your mental health
[Guest]: to just be restricted to one home. We were too scared to meet people. So when we spoke
[Guest]: to people, it was always Zoom or phone calls, FaceTime. And then we said, we've got to learn
[Guest]: to get out. By that stage, fortunately, hotels had opened again. So we picked hotels that
[Guest]: were within driving distance of Delhi, and where I was pretty sure of the COVID protocols.
[Guest]: And it's probably an unfair advantage, but because of the work I do, I can call up general
[Guest]: managers and insist that I live in a bubble, that the people around me are people who've
[Guest]: been tested or whatever. So we started traveling, we started doing, at the moment, I'm in Jaipur,
[Guest]: for instance, we started doing one weekend a month, just to give us a sense of what it
[Guest]: was like being out of home. And it did huge things for our mental health, like I'm sitting
[Guest]: here and I'm talking to you, I wrote, I've written an article today. So it's not as though
[Guest]: what I do, when I'm away is significantly different from what I would do when I was
[Guest]: at home. It's just the change of scene, I think, makes you feel less like a prisoner
[Guest]: of circumstances. But we're still careful. I still try and do room service. I avoid crowded
[Guest]: restaurants. If I'm in public, I wear masks. So travel, I think I've done an article next
[Guest]: Sunday about what you should do when you're traveling. I've also, when it comes to my
[Guest]: social life, it's zero, I think. I've been, in the last 20 months, to two people's homes
[Guest]: for dinner. Both are people who I knew had either had COVID recently, and therefore were
[Guest]: okay, or had been double vaccinated. And it was nice, it was, in a sense, reassuring,
[Guest]: you felt human again. But it's also, I mean, scary. I know people say that, I mean, I was
[Guest]: double vaccinated many months ago, I was one of the first people to be double vaccinated,
[Guest]: because I have the advantage of being over 60. But even so, I think, I continue to be
[Guest]: terrified.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I mean, that's quite resonant. And this whole sort of theme of relooking at relationships
[Amit Varma]: and how we live our lives is something that's in your book. One thing that kind of struck
[Amit Varma]: me and resonated with me in your book was that it sort of bookended with your mother,
[Amit Varma]: in a sense, obviously, it begins with your parents, and then it ends with her death three
[Amit Varma]: years ago. And that resonated with me, because one of the themes that you struck upon was
[Amit Varma]: how much she changed, where at the start of the book, she's an entirely different person.
[Amit Varma]: And at the end, when you mention her, it changes. And I've seen a similar change with my own
[Amit Varma]: parents, you know, my mother died some 13-14 years ago. And, you know, she had changed
[Amit Varma]: a lot for reasons that, you know, one can only sort of speculate upon. My dad had kind
[Amit Varma]: of changed in a different direction before he passed earlier this year, kind of mellowed
[Amit Varma]: and become a very different person. And this is a difference that one can sort of see from
[Amit Varma]: the outside. And so I have two questions here. One is that, does one's understanding of how
[Amit Varma]: people changed and all of that, does it become clearer when you're remembering because your
[Amit Varma]: book, in a sense, is an act of remembering your life? Does it become clearer with that?
[Amit Varma]: Can you take that step back and look? Because at some point, you've also done that about
[Amit Varma]: yourself, where you have reflected on how after you came back from abroad, somebody
[Amit Varma]: told your mother that, oh, he used to be so arrogant, but now he's kind of chilled out.
[Amit Varma]: And then there are some lovely passages where you sort of reflect on your own possible transformation.
[Amit Varma]: So how does this act of memory sort of help you look at others in this way? And when you
[Amit Varma]: see the change that has happened to others, possibly because of biological reasons as
[Amit Varma]: well, it's not that someone overnight changes, you know, the chemical imbalance in your brain
[Amit Varma]: changes or whatever. People just change differently. I mean, I remember I wrote a column after
[Amit Varma]: Chris Cornell, the musician committed suicide a couple of years back. And there was a sort
[Amit Varma]: of speculation that he had been on some medication, which causes suicidal thoughts. So it's not
[Amit Varma]: as if he fundamentally changed as a person. It was sort of something beyond his control.
[Amit Varma]: Similarly, we hear stories of how some of these mass shooters in the US, I think the
[Amit Varma]: last big incident like that, they did an autopsy on the guy. And they realized that around
[Amit Varma]: the time he started getting violent, there was sort of a tumor in his brain, you know,
[Amit Varma]: which caused that sort of behavior. And that kind of made me think about how character
[Amit Varma]: is so contingent, that identity is contingent, that we think that I am this, this is my essence.
[Amit Varma]: But it's all contingent upon all these accidents of circumstance, not just outside, but inside.
[Amit Varma]: So you know, does that change the way you kind of look at yourself? Does this act of
[Amit Varma]: remembering enhance your self-awareness in a sense?
[Guest]: I think it's a very good question. It's also, I think, very accurate. Because I'm not the
[Guest]: kind of guy who looks back a lot. I tend to just move on. But when I sat down to write
[Guest]: this book, I had by definition to look back. And I saw, I mean, most clearly, I think about
[Guest]: myself, but also about my mother. She is at the start of the book, this very confident,
[Guest]: Western educated woman in an era when hardly anyone was Western educated, who earns their
[Guest]: own money, who's qualified, who arranges for my father, who didn't have that kind of money
[Guest]: or any of her advantages to go off and marry her abroad, who then works in London, puts
[Guest]: him through the bar. To contrast that woman with the woman I saw after my father died,
[Guest]: it's like they were two completely different people. I think to some extent, it was tragedy
[Guest]: that I think she couldn't cope with my father's death. I think in many ways, Indian women,
[Guest]: particularly of that generation, were taught to treat their husbands as Lord and Master.
[Guest]: And that even if you had a career or you had anything, once you were married, everything
[Guest]: was second to what your husband wanted to what your husband did. And then when your
[Guest]: husband was not there any longer, you sort of lost your way. I think that was one of
[Guest]: the big problems that she faced. She'd also had in the 60s, a very serious bout of ill
[Guest]: health during which she nearly died. And though people say she recovered, etc. I think when
[Guest]: you're conscious of how fragile things are, you lose your confidence. I think that made
[Guest]: a lot of difference to her. And of course, age by the end, most of her friends that died,
[Guest]: she was hanging on, she didn't really know what to do. She was dependent on me, she was
[Guest]: at the mercy of anybody who wanted to pick on her. I mean, I say all this now with certainty,
[Guest]: but until I sat down to write the book, you're absolutely right. It had never occurred to
[Guest]: me that these were the changes in her life. Because to be widowed at 50, to never as far
[Guest]: as I know, have a boyfriend, a relationship, again, is not normal. It's strange. And yet
[Guest]: women of her generation would not consider marrying again, or all the obvious things
[Guest]: that people now would do. Certainly, I would never have objected. But I think she herself
[Guest]: was built in the way in which she thought this was it. I was in love with this man,
[Guest]: I married him. And now that part of my life is over. I remember when we came back to India
[Guest]: from New York after my father had died. She considered whether she should wear a bindi,
[Guest]: whether she should wear jewelry, that the widows in her family before had worn white
[Guest]: after that. And I was only 15. But it just struck me as such an offensive idea that she
[Guest]: should have to do any of these things. So I said, no, you wear jewelry, you wear your
[Guest]: colors. And despite that, I think for several years, five at least, after my father's death,
[Guest]: she refused to put a bindi on her head until I made an issue out of it. And I said, his
[Guest]: life has ended, your life has not ended. You shouldn't be like that. Now all of that makes
[Guest]: a certain amount of sense when I sat down and had a lot of time during the lockdown
[Guest]: to think about it. At the time, no, I don't think I think when you live with people or
[Guest]: they're close to you, you just see them change day by day, without ever figuring out what
[Guest]: it is that changed them. It's the same with me, you quote the example from that, what
[Guest]: my principal said. Until my father died when I was 15, I had, in many ways, the last few
[Guest]: years, certainly a fairly charmed life. In the last couple of years in school, I was
[Guest]: doing very well. I had good academic results. I had all the usual stuff that people like
[Guest]: me have, head of the debating team, editor of the school magazine, et cetera, et cetera.
[Guest]: And I had this, what was then, I suppose, seen by outsiders as a fairly glamorous life
[Guest]: in that we had a house in London. I went abroad for my summer holidays, and it seemed almost
[Guest]: too good to be true. And then my father died, we came back, and there was this sickening
[Guest]: realization that there wasn't going to be that much money. There was not going to be
[Guest]: a house in London. I had no future mapped out for me. Whatever I had to do, I had to
[Guest]: do on my own, that my mother was not going to be any help, that even if I was going to
[Guest]: go and study abroad, which eventually I did, I had to find the school, the university myself,
[Guest]: and that I was really left to my own devices. So I think the contrast when you're at that
[Guest]: age between leading this charmed life and thinking everything is set out in gold and
[Guest]: you know what you will do and things will be all right, which sad to say is true of
[Guest]: many people now from young business families and political families, but it was certainly
[Guest]: less true of most people then. I think that probably scared me inside. I mean, of course
[Guest]: it changed me, but I think it changed me because it scared me. It made me conscious of how
[Guest]: fragile everything is, how life can change. My father in April 1971 was this glamorous
[Guest]: globe-trotting figure who thought he'd had a bit of jaundice. By July 1971, he was dead.
[Guest]: So I've always realized that nothing in life is permanent, that things change, that
[Guest]: you never take anything for granted, that often it's circumstances beyond anybody's
[Guest]: control. And I've also, I think, realized watching my mother, that people change. Never
[Guest]: make assumptions based on what somebody is like today. There is no guarantee that the
[Guest]: person will be the same even a month later or two months later. And often, and all of
[Guest]: us must do this, you work with people and they change. You work for people. And I think
[Guest]: it happens to nearly everybody. Initially, there's a honeymoon period. They're wildly
[Guest]: enthusiastic about you when you say, I've never had a better job. And then of course,
[Guest]: they move on and they find somebody else that's less enthusiastic about you. Many people are
[Guest]: shocked by this and try and regain the attention or affections, for want of a better term,
[Guest]: of their employers or their bosses. And I think I always realized that things would
[Guest]: always change, that nothing was permanent. So in that sense that my mother and my father's
[Guest]: death changed what I was in how I looked at people. Now, I say this again, so confidently
[Guest]: in answer to your question, but it's something I only really understood when I sat down to
[Guest]: write the book.
[Amit Varma]: So how did it precisely change the way you look at other people? Like, did it make you
[Guest]: more compassionate towards them?
[Guest]: Yes, it made me much more compassionate, much more understanding of other people's problems.
[Guest]: It made me less judgmental of people. Because people do one set of things when circumstances
[Guest]: are good. And they do a completely different set of things when circumstances are bad.
[Guest]: And you've got to understand that when circumstances are bad, choices are taken out of people's
[Guest]: hands. They have to do what they have to do. I mean, there's that first line in The Great
[Guest]: Gatsby, which is, in my younger and more vulnerable years, my father gave me some advice, which
[Guest]: I've been turning over in my head ever since, when judging other people. Remember, not everyone
[Guest]: has been born with the advantages you have. And I was born with advantages, there's no
[Guest]: getting around it. And I lost many of those advantages. So I was very conscious that other
[Guest]: people either weren't born with those advantages, or had lost those advantages. And to certain
[Guest]: judgment about them, or to say things about them was wrong. So it changed me in that way.
[Guest]: It also changed me, I think, in how I respond to people. Many people on social media will
[Guest]: say that anybody says anything nice to me on Twitter says I enjoyed your column or whatever.
[Guest]: I nearly always, as much as it's humanly possible, reply. If I have an email or a message sent
[Guest]: to me, I try and reply within the hour. It's taught me that you can't take people for granted,
[Guest]: that you should be grateful for every little bit of praise, every little bit of human contact.
[Guest]: Even if you can't necessarily do what people want you to do, be polite, be decent, because
[Guest]: ultimately, you could well be in that situation, you could well be the supplicant asking somebody
[Guest]: for something. Nothing in life is written, nothing in life is guaranteed. You can't change
[Guest]: that. The only way you can change it is by, A, not having expectations of people, B, by
[Guest]: recognizing that there will be change, and C, in all your dealings with people, be as
[Guest]: compassionate and as polite as possible.
[Amit Varma]: That's a profound insight. And what sort of strikes me is that you got it so young, like,
[Amit Varma]: I think I got it much, much later than you. I think many people don't get it at all. Like
[Amit Varma]: there is, of course, this philosophical debate about whether there is any free will or not.
[Amit Varma]: And I think there's a very good case to be made that there isn't. But even if it were
[Amit Varma]: not the case that there is free will, we should still behave as if there is free will, of
[Amit Varma]: course, because you want to hold people accountable for their actions and so on. But by an extension
[Amit Varma]: of that, it often happens that we judge people for things that are essentially beyond their
[Amit Varma]: control. We, like even in our own case, when we succeed, we ascribe too much credit to
[Amit Varma]: ourselves. When we fail, we are too hard on ourselves. And we do a similar thing with
[Amit Varma]: others, whereas luck and fortune plays such an incredibly big role. And especially on
[Amit Varma]: social media. Social media, of course, is the fountainhead of being judgmental, you
[Amit Varma]: know, and we can kind of discuss that later. Another thing that intrigued me about your
[Amit Varma]: book is at one point, you say that the year 67 to 71 were your happiest years when you
[Amit Varma]: were 11 to 15. And 15, of course, is when your father died. So I'm thinking about how
[Amit Varma]: you concluded, like, how does one define particular years as happiest years? Like, do you remember
[Amit Varma]: being happy in the moment then? Or is the happiness in the remembering that those were
[Amit Varma]: good times, even though then you may not have been particularly aware of it. And the thing
[Amit Varma]: is that if you are to conclude that the happiness is in the remembering, then one could argue
[Amit Varma]: that you can remember the happiness of any particular period in time and sort of take
[Amit Varma]: pleasure in that, including the present moment like elsewhere in the book. And this I think
[Amit Varma]: is towards the end where you write about how you have learned to take happiness from small
[Amit Varma]: things, which is again, a sort of a realization that I came to much later. Obviously, those
[Amit Varma]: years are something that you kind of look upon wistfully. So tell me a little bit about
[Amit Varma]: this about what were your notions of happiness earlier? Have they kind of changed? And how
[Amit Varma]: big a role do you think that our own act of remembering plays in them? Because if I remember
[Amit Varma]: a memory as happy, it becomes happy. If I remember the non-happy aspects of it, it doesn't
[Amit Varma]: seem so happy. Maybe the happiness I get is from remembering it and at the time I was
[Guest]: just going through the motions. I think it's a very valid question. I think, I mean, now
[Guest]: that you put it to me and I think about it, one reason I see them as being such happy
[Guest]: years was those were really the last years I spent with my father. And therefore the
[Guest]: memories of my father, memories of that closeness make it happy for me. These were also the
[Guest]: years when my father would not always been successful, was very successful, had lots
[Guest]: and lots of disposable income. And when you're what, 11 years old, 12 years old, what do
[Guest]: you want? You want to holiday to London, you want to go to Hamleys, buy toys. When you're
[Guest]: slightly older to go to Carnaby Street, buy nice clothes. All of that happened. There
[Guest]: were very few demands on me. I was a lonely child. I had the love of two doting parents.
[Guest]: And then of course it collapses in 71. So it's entirely possible that while I was not
[Guest]: probably the happiest during that period, because of what followed from 1971 and the
[Guest]: unhappiness that followed, I have romanticized that period in my memory. And it seems like
[Guest]: one gorgeous, glorious sunlit period. And it wasn't really, I mean, the way you've asked
[Guest]: me that question has made me think about that. I certainly think of it always as being this
[Guest]: happy period, but that's not tied up with any notion of happiness. It's tied up because
[Guest]: I had all the things that I was to lose in 1971.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I mean, one of the themes that I keep coming back to in which I kind of read about
[Amit Varma]: it a few months back and it sort of blew me away is the nature of memory, how our brain
[Amit Varma]: processes memory in the sense that when we remember an event for the first time, we are
[Amit Varma]: remembering the event, but every subsequent time we remember the remembering. And that,
[Amit Varma]: you know, so it's like Chinese whispers in our brain and things can kind of gradually
[Amit Varma]: shift. Now, as you mentioned that you were born to great privilege and some of that was
[Amit Varma]: stripped away. But regardless of that, a lot of that remained. And when I kind of look
[Amit Varma]: back on my own childhood, I mean, I was the son of a civil servant. We were relative to
[Amit Varma]: the rest of India, extremely well off, absolutely in the elite. And it took me many years into
[Amit Varma]: adulthood to realize how some really negative character traits of mine were kind of formed
[Amit Varma]: by this. Like I realized it from my father, who was very proud of reading, who had thousands
[Amit Varma]: of books. From him, I think I got a certain intellectual arrogance. From my mother, I
[Amit Varma]: got a certain social arrogance because of where we were. And it took me many years to
[Amit Varma]: kind of strip those away and sort of become my own person as it were. And obviously, we
[Amit Varma]: are being formed throughout our lives. But we can only sort of look back on the forming
[Amit Varma]: of the past and not whatever might be happening in the present. Now, you just mentioned and
[Amit Varma]: you've written about in your book about how perhaps at 15 after your father died, it was
[Amit Varma]: a shock for you at various levels, you became more independent, you became more compassionate,
[Amit Varma]: you started taking things less for granted. But beyond that, can you kind of elaborate
[Amit Varma]: on like how self aware were you in your journey? In your book, of course, it is the act of
[Amit Varma]: writing down, it forces you to be self aware. But how much of that self awareness is there?
[Amit Varma]: Like when you look back on the younger Veer Sanghvi of say 20 years old, 25 years old,
[Amit Varma]: 30 years old, do you see things that just make you go like, shit, I was like that, or
[Amit Varma]: I did that, or I thought like that? Tell me a little bit about that.
[Guest]: I'm trying to think. I think it's fair to say that people who grew up as you and I did,
[Guest]: in upper middle class households in India, who went to what we would now concede were
[Guest]: elite institutions of learning, who were able to speak in our own language with and speak
[Guest]: in English with the same dexterity, were as much at home with Western reference points,
[Guest]: as we were with the way we were brought up, were hugely, hugely privileged during that
[Guest]: period. And I don't think I saw it because the people I was around, I went to school
[Guest]: at the boarding school, it wasn't like a fancy boarding school, like Dune School, where everybody
[Guest]: was super privileged or whatever. Most of the people who were my friends, were children
[Guest]: of lieutenant colonels in the army. Now, lieutenant colonel is a senior position, but it's not
[Guest]: like you're a general or whatever. So there was that sense, or joint secretaries, there
[Guest]: was not that sense that you were this huge, privileged person. So we thought of ourselves
[Guest]: as just being middle class. When I went abroad, and I went to England, I had the option, I
[Guest]: guess, of choosing a school that was full of privilege. And there were options to go
[Guest]: to Harrow or places like that. And I deliberately chose a school that gave me freedom, rather
[Guest]: than one that had a great reputation, or one that was a privilege. So now, whether this
[Guest]: was me consciously rejecting privilege, or whether this was me saying I'm privileged
[Guest]: anyhow, let me just go and have a good time, I'm not 100% sure about. When I came back
[Guest]: to Bombay, and I worked first for Bombay magazine in India today, and later for imprint, I became
[Guest]: more conscious of the fact that even within South Bombay, we were in a bubble relative
[Guest]: to the rest of Bombay. It didn't make that much sense to us to go to say Malad or some
[Guest]: place like that. Because we lived in an environment where people knew each other. And it was India
[Guest]: was in the 1970s, essentially, a relatively small country when it came to the upper middle
[Guest]: classes. I knew then that there was something wrong with this. I knew also that Bombay wasn't
[Guest]: India, that I needed to get out, which is I've written in the book, is possibly one
[Guest]: reason why, though I've put it slightly damningly and said, I didn't want to be a Bombay journalist
[Guest]: all my life. But it's one reason why I went out and tried to do things. But the honest
[Guest]: answer is, I think that I started working for Sunday. And by then I was what, 30 years
[Guest]: old. I don't think I was so conscious, conscious enough of the advantages I've had of the privilege
[Guest]: I've had. As you say, I've had heartbreak, I've had loss. But even after that loss, I
[Guest]: was still enormously privileged. And I don't think that had occurred to me till I was about
[Guest]: 30, which is when I began to come to terms with it.
[Amit Varma]: Right. It's interesting that you should mention Doon School as a posh school, because I had
[Amit Varma]: Kanti Bajpai on a couple of weeks back, and he had gone to Doon School and he was saying,
[Amit Varma]: you know, people have the impression...
[Amit Varma]: Isn't he principal of Doon School or something?
[Amit Varma]: He was headmaster of Doon School at one point.
[Guest]: Sorry, they're called headmasters in those schools. Our school is called principal, yeah.
[Amit Varma]: There you go. That alone shows you how posh Doon is. But his point was that Doon isn't
[Amit Varma]: posh. His point was that people have the impression all the Babalok go there, but the Babalok
[Amit Varma]: went to Delhi schools. Doon had all the people in smaller towns who did not have access to
[Amit Varma]: good schools there. But regardless, that's something we can't get into.
[Guest]: That's the sort of unusual view of Doon that was for the middle classes of Bareilly and
[Guest]: Raipur is the right school for them. It's not a view I've heard before, but if the headmaster
[Amit Varma]: says that, he says that.
[Amit Varma]: If the headmaster says that, indeed. No, and another interesting theme that kind of keeps
[Amit Varma]: cropping up is something you just referred to, that in upper class India, everybody knew
[Amit Varma]: everybody else. Like I had Ram Guha on the show and, you know, when he was in college
[Amit Varma]: in the Delhi's and 70s, he was telling me about his classmates and they're basically
[Amit Varma]: the upper crust of India today. And similarly, Kanti mentioned, oh, Ram was junior to me
[Amit Varma]: in school. So it was that kind of a scene, which has kind of, you know, changed drastically.
[Amit Varma]: How does that make you feel? I mean, the fact is that for about maybe 30, 40 years, for
[Amit Varma]: a long time, the elites were the same people, right? The people who had access to everything
[Amit Varma]: who ran the country, they were the same people. Now the rules of the game have changed in
[Amit Varma]: the sense that you can't even be sure that there are any elites because apart from the
[Amit Varma]: power of the Indian state, other power is spread out in different ways.
[Amit Varma]: It's much more diffused. Wealth is spread out in a different way. Influence is spread
[Amit Varma]: out in a different way. Is this sort of something you've thought about? Is this something you've
[Amit Varma]: ever felt kind of threatened by? Because you were a prominent person in the old elite.
[Amit Varma]: You've been an editor in journalism since your 20s. And the world has suddenly changed,
[Amit Varma]: I think, most drastically in the last 10 years. And a lot of it on social media where you
[Amit Varma]: have possibly been exposed to a sort of rudeness and disrespectfulness that you wouldn't have
[Amit Varma]: been otherwise. So just looking at these changing times, you know, how does one feel about it?
[Guest]: Well, I think there are many levels at which I can answer your question. The first is business
[Guest]: of elites and people who've been educated together and know each other is, I think,
[Guest]: to an extent true of most countries. I think England today, even now, is still more Oxbridge
[Guest]: dominated, more elite dominated, even when you're talking only of England, I think. Scotland,
[Guest]: Ireland, perhaps a different way. But England certainly is, despite all the egalitarian
[Guest]: moves of the last few years, the current prime minister is an Etonian. The man before him
[Guest]: was also an Etonian. So there is that element in societies like England, which in many ways
[Guest]: influences. But even if you go to America, and you talk to people at higher levels of
[Guest]: government, higher levels of finance or banking, almost all of them are Ivy League. So yes,
[Guest]: there is that element of he was two years junior to me at Harvard, or I knew him at
[Guest]: Yale, or he was in my college at Cambridge or whatever. So yes, there is that element
[Guest]: to of all elites, I accept that. The second element, though, this is hard to believe,
[Guest]: is I don't think at Mayo we ever saw ourselves as the elite, we saw Doon as the elite. And
[Guest]: the logical progression from Doon was to go to St. Stephen's College. And nearly all these
[Guest]: chaps who will say he was at college with me, they won't call it St. Stephen's, they'll
[Guest]: say at college with me with a capital C, are basically people from St. Stephen's. I actually
[Guest]: miss that part of it. Because after I finished at Mayo, I went off to do school in England
[Guest]: for two and a half years, which you had to in those days. And at school in England, I
[Guest]: was just another boy from India, who was different and not anything like other people over there.
[Guest]: So it knocked out any sense I'd had of being an elite. And there was also another aspect
[Guest]: of it, which is that by the time you finish in school in India, if you're a monitor, house
[Guest]: captain or whatever, you feel you're a dada, you're a top of the system. But you go back
[Guest]: and I went back, I went to back to school, because I had to do A-levels. And my first
[Guest]: term in Mill Hill, which is the school I went to in London, I was put in a dormitory along
[Guest]: with 12 other boys. And all my friends then were in colleges, places that allowed them
[Guest]: great deal of freedom. They were horrified by the idea that I was still wearing school
[Guest]: uniform, still sleeping in dormitories. So I think that knocked out some of the elite
[Guest]: pretensions that school in India may have had for me. And the thing about Oxford, at
[Guest]: least the kind of Oxford I knew, was, and I was not a member of the Bullingdon Club or
[Guest]: any fancy dining society, is that if it was an elite, it was an academic elite. You were
[Guest]: very conscious that it was very, very difficult to get into Oxford in those days. You could
[Guest]: get into an American university if you could pay for it. But in England, they paid for
[Guest]: everybody who went to university, whether it was Oxford or Cambridge, and as I discovered
[Guest]: to my delight, they also gave you a maintenance grant. So therefore, it was really much more
[Guest]: competitive perhaps, than it is today. So I did have that sense, and I will be honest
[Guest]: about it, of a degree of intellectual superiority. But I did not have that sense of being the
[Guest]: Doon, St. Stephen's Network, which then went off and joined the IAS, went off and joined
[Guest]: some box wallet company. So in that sense, I was, I suppose, a bit of an outsider. Also,
[Guest]: when I came back, the jobs I was offered, I was offered by Prem Shekhar Jha, who was
[Guest]: then with the Economic Times, to become an assistant editor there. He shifted to the
[Guest]: Financial Express, he offered that to me. I was offered by Giriraj Jain to become an
[Guest]: assistant editor at the Times of India. These were establishment jobs. The job I took editing
[Guest]: a glossy magazine, which many of my Oxford contemporaries thought was a strange thing
[Guest]: to do, after having studied PPE for three years, also put me out of that normal elite
[Guest]: stream, because I was doing something I think that most people in the elite frankly had
[Guest]: contempt for, or looked down at me. So yes, I'm never denying that I was part of the sense
[Guest]: of privilege that I got where I had, at least in the early years, almost entirely because
[Guest]: of advantages of birth and of class, not necessarily because of intelligence or IQ. But all I'm
[Guest]: saying is that there is a classic Indian network. I was not part of it. And even within Bombay,
[Guest]: the people who were the elite in Bombay, it's very different from Delhi, were the rich.
[Guest]: And I was very clearly not part of the rich. I was not part of the set that had lots of
[Guest]: money and lots of disposable income. So I was a bit of an outsider there. And journalism
[Guest]: is good because it gives you access to every set without having to be part of it, which
[Guest]: was one of the reasons I liked journalism. But in answer to your bigger question, which
[Guest]: is that India has expanded, and the old middle class counts for less and less, how do I cope
[Guest]: with that? Well, I think I knew this was inevitable when the economic reforms of 1991 came about.
[Guest]: It was clear to me that there was going to be a new middle class. It was also as clear
[Guest]: to me that many of these people would be first-generation English speakers. And I think Manmohan Singh,
[Guest]: who's the man responsible for liberalization, also recognized that. And all of us, I think,
[Guest]: at some level, welcomed it because we thought this was a great thing, that India would be
[Guest]: a much more egalitarian society. But I don't think anybody expected the direction it would
[Guest]: take. I remember Prem Shankar Jha wrote in those days a piece saying that with this growth,
[Guest]: many, many people who have not been part of the middle class will now be raised to wealth
[Guest]: and will become part of the middle class. They will not have been brought up on secular
[Guest]: values or on the values that we consider the right values for India. They will all vote
[Guest]: for the BJP. And basically, in the century ahead, the BJP is the natural party of government.
[Guest]: And I actually didn't agree with him. So maybe he's right. Now, when you look around, because
[Guest]: the new class that was raised to wealth, the new middle class, does not subscribe to any
[Guest]: of those ideas that my generation were brought upon. It believes, for instance, that if Pakistan
[Guest]: was a Muslim country, why shouldn't Hindus have run India? Why shouldn't it be a Hindu
[Guest]: country? What is all this secular nonsense except a way for a political class to get
[Guest]: the Muslim vote and to cultivate vote? I mean, you can argue and disagree with those views.
[Guest]: But I think those are pretty much the views of many new members of the middle class. What
[Guest]: I didn't expect also is how much hatred there would be of the old middle class among the
[Guest]: new middle class. If you look at the abuse that is directed at the so-called Lachchans
[Guest]: elite, pronounced in this case as Lutyens, the term Lutyens has become not really a reference
[Guest]: to people who live in Lachchans's Delhi, because the people who live in Lachchans's Delhi for
[Guest]: the last seven years are Narendra Modi, Amit Shah, and their parents, right? So it's no
[Guest]: longer a reference to the powerful people in India. It's essentially a reference to
[Guest]: English speakers, to people who speak in English, who went to, say, good colleges, good universities,
[Guest]: in a sense that you no longer matter where in charge, which is fine. I think every middle
[Guest]: class is entitled to some element of triumphalism. And fortunately for the new middle class,
[Guest]: social media has arrived to give them a much greater voice than they would otherwise have
[Guest]: had. So I am quite reconciled to them abusing me because I speak English, or I'm part of
[Guest]: some Lachchans class without ever having stayed in Lachchans's Delhi. I'm quite happy to do
[Guest]: that. But I also feel for better or for worse, that this is a phase that their children will
[Guest]: not feel the same way. This is a moment of transition. And this is a transitional generation,
[Guest]: which has a lot of bitterness and a lot of triumphalism. How their children will feel
[Guest]: about Hindu-Muslim issues, about secularism, I think we'll have to wait and see.
[Amit Varma]: Wow, that's like a fascinating note of optimism there, because everything you said before
[Amit Varma]: that is almost sort of a trope on my show. I've discussed it with various guests, you
[Amit Varma]: know, Mr. Chah's words, he wrote it at the time, are just remarkably prescient, because
[Amit Varma]: one of the themes that I've explored in many episodes with many different guests is about
[Amit Varma]: how the constitution was sort of a liberal document. I mean, it's not as liberal as I
[Amit Varma]: would like, but nevertheless more liberal than our society, that it was a liberal document
[Amit Varma]: imposed by liberal elites upon an illiberal society. As Ambedkar himself said, this is
[Amit Varma]: basically a topsoil on our society. And there was some sense there that we'll put this topsoil
[Amit Varma]: and we'll kind of change India from the top down and obviously that failed. And my sense
[Amit Varma]: has been for the last few years that Indian politics has caught up with the Indian society.
[Amit Varma]: What is the sort of polarizing politics that we see in place today is not something that
[Amit Varma]: should really surprise us. And this blindsided me, because I think all through my childhood
[Amit Varma]: and my young adulthood and all of that, my assumption was that most of us sort of are,
[Amit Varma]: you know, like liberal, secular, all of those things. And I now realized that I was in a
[Amit Varma]: bit of a bubble, that I didn't realize to what extent I was in a bubble and to what
[Amit Varma]: extent my thinking was shaped by, you know, Western notions of the enlightenment and all
[Amit Varma]: of that, which, you know, most of the country simply doesn't share. Now, you would not have
[Amit Varma]: been in that bubble per se, even if physically, geographically, you're in a bubble, you're
[Amit Varma]: a journalist, you're writing about everything, you would have sort of figured this out much
[Amit Varma]: earlier, like, you know, in your wonderful chapters about politics of the 1980s and all,
[Amit Varma]: which I'll, you know, ask you more questions on as we go along in this episode. You've
[Amit Varma]: also spoken about the Hindu vote and how Hindu resentment was growing and the different shapes
[Amit Varma]: that took during the 80s. So in a sense, you did see it coming, you did realize that it
[Amit Varma]: was all there. So was there anything about the whole process that blindsided you? And
[Amit Varma]: was there a period of time where you kind of began to realize that the country was different
[Amit Varma]: from what one's original notions of it might have been?
[Guest]: Yeah, I mean, to take your point about Dr. Ambedkar and the topsoil, and that it would
[Guest]: go down and there would be a change. I actually think that worked. It worked from 47 to about
[Guest]: 1994, 1995, largely, that the old liberal class that had framed the constitution, even
[Guest]: if it didn't continue to rule India, because all kinds of people ruled India. But those
[Guest]: values, those constitutional values that set in place, were transmitted down the line,
[Guest]: because we were growing at a very slow rate. And the rate at which we were transmitting
[Guest]: them was also slow. I believe that the break with the past comes with 1991, because suddenly
[Guest]: there's a huge spurt of growth. Suddenly there's much more affluence than India has ever seen.
[Guest]: Many families that didn't say have telephones, didn't have cars, didn't necessarily take
[Guest]: newspapers, let alone English newspapers. Suddenly the children come into the kind of
[Guest]: affluence they've not seen. The whole notion of a phone being a classifier or a dignifying
[Guest]: factor is over, because everybody now has more than one mobile phone, and then they
[Guest]: can do everything on it. The whole sense of a car, which meant something, because many
[Guest]: middle class families consider themselves to be upper middle class when they got a car,
[Guest]: that changed, because there was this big revolution. And instead of just fiats and ambassadors,
[Guest]: every kind of car was available in India, often at prices that were affordable to the
[Guest]: newly affluent. So when that happened, when this new middle class was created, partly
[Guest]: because of the collapse of the old signifiers, and partly because of the huge rate of growth,
[Guest]: I think the attempt of people at the top to try and convey this to people died down. And
[Guest]: I think many people, the RSS for instance, if you look at the appointments that were
[Guest]: made in what there was no HRD ministry then, but in various key officials and positions
[Guest]: and ministries from 77 to 79, many people were sympathetic to an RSS worldview got it.
[Guest]: And even during the Vajpayee time, we forget this now, because we sometimes romanticize
[Guest]: the Vajpayee period. The HRD minister was my friend, Murali Manohar Joshi, who's, I
[Guest]: mean, I said this about him to his face, so I can say this again, that most politicians
[Guest]: set out to make history. He's the only chap I know who set out to rewrite history. I mean,
[Guest]: his entire mission was not to do anything of any note himself, but to rewrite what people
[Guest]: had done before. And he and Uma Bharti was briefly his minister of state, legitimized
[Guest]: the writing of history in a way that played down Muslim achievements, played up Hindu
[Guest]: achievements. If you look at it, this is now a very fashionable controversy in Sanghi circles.
[Guest]: If you look at the story of the Indus Valley civilization, about which we really don't
[Guest]: know very much, and we have always wondered if those people were Hindus or they weren't
[Guest]: Hindus. I mean, maybe they were, maybe the statue of what looks like Shiva in his Pashupati
[Guest]: pose is really Shiva. Maybe it's a precursor of Hindus, we don't know. But it was during
[Guest]: Dr. Joshi's time that it became the stated policy of the Sanghi elite to claim that the
[Guest]: Indus Valley civilization was a Hindu civilization. It was not an Indus Valley civilization, Dr.
[Guest]: Joshi said repeatedly, it was a Saraswati civilization created on the banks of the Saraswati
[Guest]: River, which no longer exists now. And it was built by Hindus. And I could never really
[Guest]: understand it. And I used to say to him, how does it matter whether they were Hindus, whether
[Guest]: they had some pre Hindu religion, whether they were Dravidians, whether they were Aryans.
[Guest]: And it was only much later I realized what they were building up to. They were building
[Guest]: up to saying that all Muslims were invaders, and therefore not true Indians. Now you had
[Guest]: a problem because the Indus Valley civilization from all accounts was a pre Aryan civilization.
[Guest]: So if you accepted that, then you had to accept that the Aryans were the first people who
[Guest]: came in, possibly through invasion, otherwise through migration. He didn't say that at the
[Guest]: time. But now, when you see the controversies and you see the manufactured stuff about DNA,
[Guest]: et cetera, this is what they were building at. And it was, I think, in a way, done at
[Guest]: such a basic level that people like me, who, as you say, are blindsided, we didn't realize
[Guest]: what they were doing. That's when it began. That's when they started changing the whole
[Guest]: idea of history. We think that their motive is to erase memories of the Nehru's and the
[Guest]: Gandhi's and to portray them as crooks and all that, which I'm sure it is. But that is
[Guest]: not their primary agenda. Their primary agenda is to say that Hinduism is the oldest, greatest
[Guest]: religion in the world. We were always a Hindu nation. There was never a non-Hindu over here.
[Guest]: Hinduism grew in India. And anybody who came from outside, if it was a Muslim, he was an
[Guest]: invader. If it was a Christian, he was a toady of the East India Company or white people
[Guest]: because brown sepoy is such an insult in sanghi circles. So they started at that stage with
[Guest]: that kind of agenda. Not all of us have got it. And that agenda now, because it's been
[Guest]: taught in schools, because state governments rewrote history books, many of the teachers
[Guest]: who joined and they were appointed were RSS sympathizers, people like that. You have a
[Guest]: whole generation that's been brought up to believe that we were a vegetarian Hindu civilization
[Guest]: from time immemorial. And then these nasty Mughals arrived, killed our cows and turned
[Guest]: us into non-vegetarians. And we must always resist their influence. Oddly enough, the
[Guest]: Delhi Sultanate, the people who came before the Mughals, I don't think they're aware of
[Guest]: because they certainly don't mention them. They believe that Muslim rule in India began
[Guest]: with the Mughals. And it's frightening how many people who you would think would be brighter
[Guest]: than this actually buy into this vision of India. And this vision of India is the vision
[Guest]: of India they've picked up in the schools. It's the vision of India they've picked up
[Guest]: from their school teachers. And so when you have a class that has not ever subscribed
[Guest]: to the great secular liberal values that appeared to be the foundation of the new India, and
[Guest]: one that has been brought up on this RSS version of Indian history, it's not difficult to see
[Guest]: why secularism is in its death throes.
[Amit Varma]: A number of ironies here. And one irony, of course, is that the real vision of the division
[Amit Varma]: of what India really was, is far more glorious than this artificial sort of made up vision.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, I think the most glorious part of what makes us Indian is that we take influences
[Amit Varma]: from everywhere and make it our own. You know, this rich, delightful khichdi that we are
[Amit Varma]: right down to the, you know, the elegant churidar kurtas of a prime minister, which of course
[Amit Varma]: have an Islamic origin and practically all the food that we eat, you know, which is from
[Amit Varma]: outside. And I've of course had an episode on food with Vikram Doctor, you know, and
[Amit Varma]: none of that would be new to you. I also had episodes with Tony Joseph and Peggy Mohan.
[Guest]: So you know the Indus Valley thing and the campaign of slander and calumny has been unleashed
[Guest]: against Tony and people who dared to tell the truth there.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, because I think this is one way in which the Sangh were blindsided, because their assumption
[Amit Varma]: was this history is so old that you can make up whatever you want, and then it becomes
[Amit Varma]: a battle between narratives. And suddenly there is science in the picture. Suddenly
[Amit Varma]: you actually have irrefutable scientific evidence that, hey, you know, these are the different
[Amit Varma]: times at which these migrations happened. And hey, the Indus Valley people might well
[Amit Varma]: have spoken in early precursor to Tamil, which is, by the way, an older language than Sanskrit.
[Amit Varma]: And all of this, I think, would have blindsided those guys.
[Amit Varma]: The other interesting thought that kind of comes up here is about the unintended effects
[Amit Varma]: of liberalization, which is almost ironic, because I, of course, I'm a big champion of
[Amit Varma]: liberalization and how it empowered millions of people and so on and so forth. But if the
[Amit Varma]: thesis is true that our elite was liberal and our society was not, then what the empowerment
[Amit Varma]: of the rest of society meant paradoxically is that becoming more liberal in, you know,
[Amit Varma]: at an economic level allowed the illiberalism at a social level to sort of express itself.
[Amit Varma]: And that kind of became what it became. Like there's a great book, the sociologist Timur
[Amit Varma]: Kuran wrote in 1999 called Public Lies, Private Truths, where he coined this phrase called
[Amit Varma]: preference falsification. And his thing was that most people do something called preference
[Amit Varma]: falsification, where if they feel something that is apparently not acceptable in society,
[Amit Varma]: they won't say it. His example was you look at the downfall of the Soviet Union, where
[Amit Varma]: it appeared to happen overnight. But for decades, many people held a resentment against a state
[Amit Varma]: which they were afraid to express because they thought they'd get into trouble. That
[Amit Varma]: was preference falsification. But you reach a critical mass where you realize that, hey,
[Amit Varma]: many more people are like you. And that leads to a preference cascade and overnight things
[Amit Varma]: change. And I think in a sense, social media especially exacerbated that as many people
[Amit Varma]: who felt a particular way and not to get judgmental, I mean, of course, I disagree with a lot of
[Amit Varma]: what comes out of there, but not to be judgmental about that. But they felt X, they thought,
[Amit Varma]: oh, you know, this is a liberal secular country, we are not supposed to feel X. And they realize,
[Amit Varma]: hey, everybody feels X. And it kind of just explodes from there. So just a whole bunch
[Amit Varma]: of ironies there. Before we go on to talking about politics,
[Guest]: Can I just add one more thing? Sure.
[Guest]: When we talk about these people who say Muslims are invaders, and Savarkar was God descended
[Guest]: to us, etc. We use terms like liberal and conservative, or left wing or right wing.
[Guest]: And when you actually look at the issues on which there is a difference, the way in which
[Guest]: you define a person who's not a liberal in India, and the way you define a person who's
[Guest]: allegedly right wing in India is not economic. Mr. Modi's governance is much more left wing
[Guest]: than say, Manmohan Singh's was, so it's not. So what is it? Ultimately, this whole distinction
[Guest]: comes down to just one issue, how you look at Muslims. If you take away the Hindu Muslim
[Guest]: distinction, what is the right wing left with? There is nothing. It's essentially this ideology,
[Guest]: the Indian right wing, the ideology is based on nothing more than the sense of othering
[Guest]: the Muslim. And as part of the process of othering the Muslim, creating a great Hindu
[Guest]: nation in its mind. Now, the irony is that there is a great, great
[Guest]: Hindu heritage in India, just as there is a great Muslim heritage in India. But the
[Guest]: great Hindu heritage that really happened, that really existed, doesn't seem to worry
[Guest]: them at all. They don't even seem aware of it. They feel it necessary to create a bogus
[Guest]: Hindu heritage, in which Ganeshji was made what he is by plastic surgery, in which Rishi
[Guest]: Munis went around on aeroplanes, in which there was Ram Rajya all over. It's not even
[Guest]: history, it's mythology. And if you take away that mythological heritage, and the hatred
[Guest]: of Muslims, there really isn't an ideological plank at all. Whereas if you look at say the
[Guest]: liberal positions, the values, the beliefs and freedom of expression, freedom of speech,
[Guest]: freedom of religion, there is no counterpart on the other side. It's only, only about hating
[Amit Varma]: Muslims, which is what's worrying. Yeah, no, absolutely. As Arun Shourie famously
[Amit Varma]: said, in fact, NDA is equal to UPA plus cow. So I agree, it does come down to that. And
[Amit Varma]: it's ironic that Modi should fulminate so much against Nehru and Indira because he has
[Amit Varma]: totally adopted Nehru's top-down status thinking right down to, you know, import substitution
[Amit Varma]: becoming made in India and Atmanirbhar and whatever. He's totally been inspired by Indira
[Amit Varma]: Gandhi's authoritarianism and her ways. One feels that sometimes he almost envies the
[Amit Varma]: kind of power that she had and so on and so forth.
[Guest]: I sometimes feel that if Sanjay Gandhi had lived, he would have been like Narendra Modi
[Guest]: yesterday. He's pretty much in continuation of that strand. He's not in continuation of
[Amit Varma]: the Vajpayee Advani strand at all. Yeah, absolutely. And it's ironic that, you
[Amit Varma]: know, every time Sanjay Gandhi's birth anniversary or death anniversary comes up, the Congress
[Amit Varma]: will tweet out, you know, celebratory tweets of what a great man he was. And I'm like,
[Guest]: this is another rewriting of history happening. I mean, he was a monster. And this leads me
[Amit Varma]: to then, therefore, to another thought, which is that, you know, the German political theorist
[Amit Varma]: Carl Schmitt had once spoken about how in politics to be successful, you need an enemy,
[Amit Varma]: you need an other, right? Which, as you pointed out, you know, Shourie said NDA is equal to
[Amit Varma]: UPA plus cow. He made cow the symbol of that. You're saying it's hatred of Muslims, which
[Amit Varma]: it absolutely is. I did an episode with Akshay Mukul on his great book about the Gita Press,
[Amit Varma]: which kind of spoke about how all of these things, cow slaughter, love jihad, they've
[Amit Varma]: been around for decades and part of politics. Now, if you look at Indian politics, it would
[Amit Varma]: seem that till the BJP came up, perhaps not, because who was really the other. But on the
[Amit Varma]: other hand, I think an argument could be made, and I'm thinking aloud again, that what really
[Amit Varma]: happened at independence was you had one big party, that was the Congress. And you had,
[Amit Varma]: in a sense, decades of inertia, minor little tactical skirmishes here and there. But what's
[Amit Varma]: this kind of politics, in your view, always inevitable? Because, you know, you rise in
[Amit Varma]: politics, you get the vote out, so to say, you mobilize your basis by whipping up hatred
[Amit Varma]: against the other. It's much easier to do it that way than to talk vaguely about abstract
[Amit Varma]: notions of hope and togetherness. In that sense, would you say that politics like this
[Amit Varma]: was always sort of inevitable or is that falling prey to the hindsight bias? Are there different
[Amit Varma]: paths that could have been taken?
[Guest]: No, look, it would be foolish to deny that there were always Hindu-Muslim tensions. If
[Guest]: there were no such tensions, there would be no Pakistan today, there would be no partition.
[Guest]: But equally, once we got on with the task of creating India, after 1947, tensions between
[Guest]: Hindus and Muslims, the proportion of Muslims who felt strongly that there were illities
[Guest]: in India, the proportion of Hindus who felt that no business being there was relatively
[Guest]: small. If you look at the history of the RSS, which dominated this kind of thinking, it
[Guest]: really wasn't a significant factor in Indian political life. The first time the RSS begins
[Guest]: to matter is around 75, 76, maybe 74, when Jayaprakash Narayan ignores the advice of
[Guest]: all his colleagues and says, the RSS are wonderful chaps and we must use them in the fight against
[Guest]: Indira Gandhi. And from then on, there's been no looking back for the RSS. The Jansang stroke,
[Guest]: which became the BJP, on the other hand, has never had it that good. In the 1984-85 election,
[Guest]: Rajiv Gandhi won that huge slide. Charan Singh got three seats, the BJP Jansang it was then,
[Guest]: though they called themselves the old Jantarbati, effectively, they were the Jansang. They got
[Guest]: just two seats. So as recently as that, there was no evidence that they existed. Now, there
[Guest]: are two theories for how they took off. And both, I think, have some element of truth.
[Guest]: One is that Advani was able to pick up on the resentment amongst Hindus. And that resentment
[Guest]: was exacerbated by what they saw as a lack of growth. There were other resentments, which
[Guest]: were all mobilized under the Hindu umbrella. I have a slightly, which I mean, it's true,
[Guest]: there's no doubt about it. I have a slightly different theory, which is not, I think, contradictory
[Guest]: to this one, which is that the Hindu vote actually comes about in India in the early
[Guest]: 1980s, when the Sikh agitation starts. Until that point, there had always been Hindu-Muslim
[Guest]: tensions. But most Hindus had always regarded Sikhs as being brothers, as being almost Hindus
[Guest]: in the way that Hindus regard, say, Jains as being almost Hindus. When that turned violent,
[Guest]: when the Sikhs turned against Hindus, and though we airbrushed this out of history,
[Guest]: there were massacres of Hindus. They would stop buses and segregate the Hindu and Sikh
[Guest]: passengers and kill the Hindus. Many important Hindu newspaper owners, leaders, politicians
[Guest]: were killed. I think that led to a certain amount of anger within the Hindus of India.
[Guest]: And if you look at the way in which we reacted to Blue Star, which I opposed at the time,
[Guest]: there was so much triumphalism that now we would call Hindu triumphalism. There was a
[Guest]: sense of we've taught these guys a lesson. It got increased after Mrs. Gandhi's assassination.
[Guest]: I do not for a moment dispute that the Delhi riots were led and organized by Congress leaders.
[Guest]: That the people who took part and the people who supported it weren't all congressmen.
[Guest]: They were also ordinary Hindus who seem to think, as people do in communal riots, that
[Guest]: this was not such a bad thing. I think that Hindu backlash, that Hindu vote contributed
[Guest]: to Rajiv Gandhi's huge, huge election victory in 84, 85. Nobody had that, and he could not
[Guest]: have done it, I don't think, if the Hindus had not voted for him. People forget this,
[Guest]: that in 84, 85, the RSS backed Rajiv Gandhi. Nobody from the RSS went out to campaign for
[Guest]: BJP candidates. The BJP did very badly. Atal Bihari Vajpayee lost his own seat.
[Guest]: So there was that opportunity from 85 to 89 for the Congress to decide what it wanted
[Guest]: to do with the Hindu vote. If you spoke to people like Arun Nehru at that stage, they
[Guest]: believed that they could harness the Hindu vote and use it for constructive purposes.
[Guest]: You could say this is an oxymoron, but this was genuinely Arun Nehru's view. It wasn't
[Guest]: the BJP that opened the locks of the Babri Masjid. It was the Congress government. It
[Guest]: was, from all accounts, Arun Nehru, who then looked after UP, who gave those instructions.
[Guest]: Arun Nehru wanted then for the Congress to become the party of the Hindus, not in a bad
[Guest]: way, he said, not in a way that meant you attacked Muslims or whatever. Rajiv Gandhi
[Guest]: did not agree with that or wasn't even happy with that. If you look at the things Rajiv
[Guest]: Gandhi did, Shah Banu, the ban of the Satanic Verses, those were maybe Shah Banu slightly
[Guest]: more significant, but Satanic Verses was a book that now the Hindus were outraged about
[Guest]: it and now the Muslims are outraged about it, was ever going to read. But it was symbolism.
[Guest]: It was impossible after the way Rajiv Gandhi had behaved on those issues for any Hindu
[Guest]: to suggest that the Congress was a Hindu party. By this stage, even Arun Nehru had been thrown
[Guest]: out. So Rajiv turned his back on the Hindu vote. Where was it going to go? And I think
[Guest]: Mr. Advani saw it, saw the opportunity, and then capitalized on it, weaponized the whole
[Guest]: Ayodhya agitation, and began the BJP's rise to fame. Even then, during the Narasimha Rao
[Guest]: period, there were elections, state elections held after the demolition of the Babri Masjid,
[Guest]: and the BJP was defeated in all of them. So it was still a kind of thing that could have
[Guest]: gone either way. But as the Congress became more and more aggressively secular, as more
[Guest]: and more people joined the middle class, as there was much more money with newly-enriched
[Guest]: Hindus, I think that Hindu wave grew.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, and that narrative in your book about the 84 election onwards was quite fascinating.
[Amit Varma]: And as you pointed out, most people don't realize that when the BJP was formed, Vajpayee
[Amit Varma]: gave these vague talks of Gandhi and socialism, quote unquote, and all of that, and they kind
[Amit Varma]: of moved away from that strand. I did an episode with Vinay Sitapati recently, who wrote the
[Amit Varma]: book on the BJP before Modi. And his thesis, which you add a lot of nuance to and even
[Amit Varma]: contradict at points, his thesis was that, look, you know, it was a Congress which went
[Amit Varma]: after the Hindu vote in the 80s, and the BJP realized they have to compete and then they
[Amit Varma]: went after it also. And they had to go to an extreme because that was the only way they
[Amit Varma]: could get ahead of the Congress. And the nuance you've added is that at the level of individuals
[Amit Varma]: that's not quite true, that Rajiv Gandhi actually stopped coating the Hindu wave, you pointed
[Amit Varma]: out he didn't even realize that the 84 win could have had the Hindu wave as a contributing
[Amit Varma]: factor. And he seemed to believe, and I presume there were others in the think tank at the
[Amit Varma]: time who believed that, listen, it is safer to go for the 11% Muslim vote or whatever
[Amit Varma]: that percentage was, because they will vote as a bloc, and the Hindu vote will always
[Amit Varma]: be splintered across caste line, which I kind of found interesting, just breaking up, you
[Amit Varma]: know, the different factions within the Congress that Arun Nehru believed this, Rajiv believed
[Amit Varma]: this and so on. But sorry, you were saying? I was saying that, I think the point Vinay
[Guest]: makes in his book is that we make this big contrast between Advani and Vajpayee. But
[Guest]: the truth is no secular person in that era would have joined the RSS, right? At least
[Guest]: not in the traditional definition of secular. So yes, Mr. Vajpayee also grew up from that
[Guest]: background. The difference, ultimately, between him and the average BJP person was he wanted
[Guest]: to have his cake and eat it too. He wanted the Hindu vote to get him into power. But
[Guest]: once he was in power, he wanted to be Jawaharlal Nehru. And he wanted to be much more statesman
[Guest]: like. And I think that was the inherent tension in the Vajpayee leadership between Vajpayee
[Guest]: and Advani. And it was not a sustainable situation. And it collapsed. And you had, I mean, BJP
[Guest]: is actually quite big on Nehru Gandhi idols. After Vajpayee's Nehru Act failed, you had
[Guest]: Mr. Modi with his Indira Gandhi Act and so far it's working. No, that's a very nice way
[Amit Varma]: of putting it that when he came to power, he wanted to be Nehru. And actually Vajpayee
[Amit Varma]: I think was an outstanding Prime Minister. I mean, one can quibble about small things,
[Amit Varma]: but on the whole, he was so different from what we have now. And so my next question
[Amit Varma]: is this that it is rational at that stage once Rajiv turns away from it and Arun Nehru
[Amit Varma]: eventually like you mentioned, ended up joining the BJP and then going back to the Congress
[Amit Varma]: and long story. But it's rational at that point for Advani and Vajpayee to quote the
[Amit Varma]: Hindu vote and go to whatever extremes that they were going. But were they riding a lion
[Amit Varma]: that they could not control? Like you point out and Vinay also points out in his book
[Amit Varma]: that after the Babri Masjid was demolished, Advani himself claimed to be blindsided by
[Amit Varma]: it. He broke out in tears. It wasn't what he intended. And one of the shifts that we
[Amit Varma]: see in Jan Sangh slash BJP, that whole thing is that each leader is kind of more extreme
[Amit Varma]: than the previous guy, that Advani seems more hardline than Vajpayee, then Modi comes, maybe
[Amit Varma]: Adityanath is next. And I have actually entered a lot of these right wing rabbit holes in
[Amit Varma]: a sort of fascination these days, where you have people not only saying that Modi has
[Amit Varma]: let the Hindus down, but Adityanath is too moderate, you know, and it seems to be getting
[Amit Varma]: more and more extreme. And you would imagine that in these times, for someone to rise within
[Amit Varma]: a party like that, you can't rise by being a moderate, you rise by being an extremist
[Amit Varma]: and holding everyone to purism tests and all of that. And therefore, a party will naturally
[Amit Varma]: get more and more extreme till the point that it splinters. So what do you think of this
[Guest]: thesis?
[Guest]: No, I actually agree completely with you. I think when you go down this path towards
[Guest]: one, there's a slightly loaded terms, but communalism, intolerance, etc. It's a slippery
[Guest]: slope. Because how much intolerance is enough? If you can say that we should do this to Muslims,
[Guest]: the next guy will come along and say, no, no, why don't we go further? It's a little
[Guest]: bit like being an alcoholic or a junkie. In the beginning, a couple of drinks is enough.
[Guest]: But as time goes on, you need the whole bottle and then the whole case. So I think that is
[Guest]: the danger with the BJP. And in many ways, oddly enough, as bizarre as this sounds, the
[Guest]: hope for Indian inclusiveness, because the more extreme it gets, it will begin to turn
[Guest]: people off. And as you say, it will splinter. I think a leader like Mr. Modi, who has the
[Guest]: ability to control the whole party, to tell the RSS where to get off, is what, once in
[Guest]: a century leader? Advani or Vajpayee couldn't tell the RSS where to get off. Mr. Modi has
[Guest]: that kind of power, that kind of charisma. You can argue about how he acquired it, how
[Guest]: much is manufactured, but let's not dispute that he has. But once that goes, and once
[Guest]: people start saying, he's let the Hindus down, he's not gone far enough, Yogi is much better,
[Guest]: or saying that Yogi is now being captured by power, he's forgotten his roots, which
[Guest]: is beginning to happen. I don't see how the BJP can survive as a coherent force.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I'm reminded of this, and this doesn't seem apropos, but I'm just reminded of something
[Amit Varma]: that a journalist friend of mine, Rishi Majumdar once told me, where he was once lynched. And
[Amit Varma]: lynched, by the way, doesn't mean a crowd kills you, the crowd beats you up basically.
[Amit Varma]: So he was once lynched. And he explained to me the anatomy of how lynchings absolutely
[Amit Varma]: occur. And after that, I kind of read up on this and realized that there's a common pattern
[Amit Varma]: to it, which is that it's not as if somebody goes up to you and they start beating you
[Amit Varma]: immediately and everybody just comes and starts beating you. There are two dynamics at play
[Amit Varma]: here. One is that typically what happens is that a bunch of people will come and talk
[Amit Varma]: to you and there'll be an argument and blah, blah. And you'll be fighting with a bunch
[Amit Varma]: of people, arguing with a bunch of people. And then somebody who isn't part of that argument
[Amit Varma]: will just decide to take it into his own hands, come from outside, give you one back, and
[Amit Varma]: then others join in. And then there is this phenomenon where everybody has a threshold
[Amit Varma]: for joining in the violence. There are people who if they see one other person hit you will
[Amit Varma]: get emboldened and hit you. There are others who will hold out till 10 people do that or
[Amit Varma]: 20 people do that or 100 people do that. But at some point, everybody in the crowd is kind
[Amit Varma]: of baying for blood, which, you know, metaphorically does sound like the way a lot of things kind
[Guest]: of.
[Amit Varma]: That's actually a very, very good parallel. It's exactly right. Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah. So let's kind of take a quick commercial break. And on the other side of the break,
[Amit Varma]: there's lots to talk about.
[Amit Varma]: Have you always wanted to be a writer but never quite gotten down to it? Well, I'd love
[Amit Varma]: to help you. Over the last few months, I've enjoyed teaching my online course, the art
[Amit Varma]: of clear writing, and an online community has now sprung up of all my past students.
[Amit Varma]: We have workshops, a newsletter to showcase the work of students and vibrant community
[Amit Varma]: interaction that offers much stimulation, and even some comfort in these difficult times.
[Amit Varma]: In the course itself, through four webinars spread over four weekends, I share all I know
[Amit Varma]: about the craft and practice of clear writing. There are many exercises, much interaction,
[Amit Varma]: and a lovely and lively community at the end of it. The course costs rupees 10,000 plus
[Amit Varma]: GST or about $150. And the August classes begin on the 7th of August. So if you're interested,
[Amit Varma]: head on over to register at indiancut.com slash clear writing. That's indiancut.com
[Amit Varma]: slash clear writing. Being a good writer doesn't require God given talent, just the willingness
[Amit Varma]: to work hard and a clear idea of what you need to do to refine your skills. I'd like
[Amit Varma]: to help you.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome back to the scene in the unseen. I'm chatting with Veer Sanghvi about his exciting
[Amit Varma]: life which somehow you know, the title of your book A Rude Life is really not appropriate
[Amit Varma]: because you know, what you define as rudeness is really asking provocative questions once
[Amit Varma]: in a while to important people and rudeness has taken on just an entirely new dimension
[Amit Varma]: in the modern age. But leaving that aside, you know, we were chatting about politics
[Amit Varma]: before the break, and I'll come back to politics later. But I kind of want to go back now to
[Amit Varma]: your personal journey. How important were books and reading to you? I remember reading
[Amit Varma]: you from the 1990s. I can't recall what your writing was like then, but I really enjoyed
[Amit Varma]: Sunday I thought they had the best political coverage and so on. And I always enjoyed your
[Amit Varma]: writing in the sense that you always had this clear, lucid style, without any sense of,
[Amit Varma]: you know, the pros being labored or a lot of the problems that you typically would find
[Amit Varma]: with Indian journalism. So, you know, I know your dad was a writer, he wrote articles and
[Amit Varma]: columns and a bunch of books. So what kind of stuff did you read back in the day? And
[Amit Varma]: did you have aspirations of being a writer? What was your perception of yourself when
[Amit Varma]: you were a kid?
[Guest]: Well, I used to read a lot, I think mainly because my family used to read a lot. I didn't,
[Guest]: I mean, I never really got to the stage where I read lots and lots of literary books. It
[Guest]: was Agatha Christie and Perry Mason and spy thrillers and stuff like that, which I enjoyed
[Guest]: John le Carre stuff. But I think a stage came, a phase came, when I stopped reading that
[Guest]: much fiction. Most of my, I still read a hell of a lot, but most of my reading now is nonfiction.
[Guest]: And my wife, who reads lots and lots of fiction, always says that people who read fiction generally
[Guest]: have bigger imaginations. They have a bigger sense of what people are like, a more creative
[Guest]: worldview. Fortunately, I don't have that. I enjoy reading nonfiction. I read biographies,
[Guest]: I read lots of political books. I enjoy learning things. And pretty much everything I do from
[Guest]: food to whatever, I've learned from books. So books have in a sense, made me what I am,
[Guest]: though they're not necessarily great classic novels or whatever, just biographies, accounts
[Guest]: of what has happened. That's the kind of stuff I read.
[Amit Varma]: And that kind of gets me to thinking because obviously, you know, Agatha Christie, Perry
[Amit Varma]: Mason, I'm in my late 40s, so maybe about a decade and a half younger than you. And
[Amit Varma]: I've had other guests on the show of a similar age, or older than me. And we'll all talk
[Amit Varma]: about kind of the same kind of books, because in India, you had a restricted supply of books
[Amit Varma]: that you can get. So it's all your Annette Blytons and Hardy Boys to begin with, you
[Amit Varma]: read a lot of Woodhouse, you even listen to the same bands as you go through college,
[Amit Varma]: and it's all restricted. And obviously, it's a bad thing that is restricted. And one celebrates
[Amit Varma]: everything that is available today. But what that also does is that I have the sense that
[Amit Varma]: there are common reference points that I can have with someone say, a couple of decades
[Amit Varma]: older than me or a decade younger than me. But today, those reference points have vanished
[Amit Varma]: that whereas you had people who were born in maybe four decades reading the same people
[Amit Varma]: listening to the same stuff, having the same kind of cultural checkpoints, that's no longer
[Amit Varma]: the case. Is that something you feel and is there a disconnect there between our generation
[Amit Varma]: and and the generation today, not just in the sense of a standard disconnect between
[Amit Varma]: every generation, but particularly so like, you know, one of the guests who had appeared
[Amit Varma]: on a podcast I produced Brave New World had mentioned how it's a bit of an illusion that
[Amit Varma]: people will know history better or will have a wider set of references because everything
[Amit Varma]: is available for free on the internet. He pointed out that studies show that most people
[Amit Varma]: are actually consuming what was produced in the last three days, whether it's on YouTube
[Amit Varma]: or podcasts or whatever. So is that something that you noticed because you are actually
[Amit Varma]: a media person yourself in that sense. And the way people consume media, discover media,
[Amit Varma]: filter media, it's just changed completely.
[Guest]: Yeah, I think also, first of all, people don't read books in the way they're supposed to.
[Guest]: I mean, publishers will tell you that book sales are up and it's one thing that survived
[Guest]: the collapse of media, it may well be true in terms of figures. But I find fewer and
[Guest]: fewer people seem to read books and you're right, there are no reference points. The
[Guest]: good thing for me about the internet is the mountain of information and background it
[Guest]: provides. If you want to find out about something, you go on the internet, you find articles
[Guest]: from six years ago, seven years ago, you learn, you read. But that unfortunately, as you say,
[Guest]: is not how people are consuming the internet. People see the internet as being a guide to
[Guest]: the here and now. And therefore, the more topical it seems, the more sensational it
[Guest]: seems, the more fun it seems, the more likely they are to go on the net. When it comes to
[Guest]: nonfiction, which is the kind of stuff I read, I find that younger people are much less interested
[Guest]: in nonfiction books, unless it can be shown that it will help them. So if somebody does
[Guest]: a book on learning from startup geniuses on how to become a millionaire at 22, young people
[Guest]: read it, they won't learn anything, they won't become startup geniuses, but they will feel
[Guest]: that it is something that's actually going to help them. The sense and it's ironic, we've
[Guest]: never had so much information available for free for so many people. The sense that learning
[Guest]: is worth it for its own sake, I find is disappearing.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, and I'll just produce a counterpoint to that because having kind of presented the
[Amit Varma]: negative view, the positive view is something that I discovered to my surprise, like, you
[Amit Varma]: know, I had the publisher VK Karthik on my show a year and a half back, and she spoke
[Amit Varma]: about how book sales are, you know, exactly what you said, they're doing fine. And my
[Amit Varma]: sense there is that there has always been a small group of people in every generation
[Amit Varma]: who read and that group will continue being whatever percentage it is. So your book sales
[Amit Varma]: will stay where what they are. The question is, what are the others doing? But you know,
[Amit Varma]: when I started this podcast, I had the impression that people have short attention spans, they
[Amit Varma]: don't want depth, you got to be topical, you got to keep episodes to 20 minutes, I even
[Amit Varma]: had a nine minute episode. With time, I realized that I was completely wrong about that. And
[Amit Varma]: part of that is, of course, the nature of the medium that people listen to podcasts
[Amit Varma]: when they're a captive audience, like when they're commuting or working out or doing
[Amit Varma]: errands, they listen to it at higher speeds, usually double speed or more, you know, good
[Amit Varma]: taking it one step up at a time and getting used to it. So captive audience listening
[Amit Varma]: faster. But most importantly, the third point why this longer length really kind of became
[Amit Varma]: popular is that people crave depth, that, you know, we seem to, I think, judge social
[Amit Varma]: media. And I know I certainly made this mistake, that you see vocal minorities out there who
[Amit Varma]: are getting shriller and shriller, and you assume that everyone is like that, and there's
[Amit Varma]: so much shallowness and all of that. But there is a silent majority out there, which one
[Amit Varma]: is not part of those polarized discourse, which might watch it with bemusement, but
[Amit Varma]: not participate, which is why silent majority. But there is a craving for knowledge and part
[Amit Varma]: of the craving for knowledge is because the rest of the media has actually abdicated because,
[Amit Varma]: you know, whether you're looking at television or newspapers or whatever, they are, as a
[Amit Varma]: friend of mine Prem Panicker puts it, they are a mile wide and an inch deep. And part
[Amit Varma]: of that is, of course, economic imperatives, right? If you've paid a huge license fee to
[Amit Varma]: buy an FM station or a news channel or whatever, the costs are so high, you have no option
[Amit Varma]: but to cater to the lowest common denominator. So someone who actually comes out and provides
[Amit Varma]: deep content, that there is a hunger for it, which struck me. And one of the memes that
[Amit Varma]: happens on my show is that I have exhaustive show notes where I recommend books and my
[Amit Varma]: guests recommend books more importantly. And there is this meme of seen in the unseen bookshelves
[Amit Varma]: where people will post pictures on Twitter of books they've bought, you know, having
[Amit Varma]: discovered them from my show. So there is this irony that there is this hunger, there
[Amit Varma]: is this content out there. How do you discover and filter this content? And my show kind
[Amit Varma]: of filled a fortuitous kind of gap. But I think that there is something there that media
[Amit Varma]: has missed, that the way that we consume and discover and filter information and knowledge
[Amit Varma]: has changed completely. And a traditional media hasn't kind of kept up with it. So a
[Guest]: bit of a ramble on my side, but what are your thoughts?
[Guest]: No, it's actually a fascinating ramble. I know your show is very, very successful because
[Guest]: people quote it all the time. But like how many people listen to say the average episode?
[Amit Varma]: You know, in a good month, I'll have a total downloads of 180,000.
[Guest]: So now 180,000 is more than any magazine or newspaper, anybody in India is able to manage.
[Amit Varma]: Let me elaborate on that, if I might interrupt, because someone who might hear that figure
[Amit Varma]: might say that hey, YouTube videos have 2 million, 3 million views.
[Amit Varma]: No, that's very different.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, it's very different. Because on YouTube, your average viewing time of a video may be
[Amit Varma]: 15 seconds, 20 seconds, whatever, you know, my average session is 40 minutes. And this
[Amit Varma]: is something it's not just my podcast, other great long form podcasters have also discovered
[Amit Varma]: that the level of engagement is far greater. And when I say the average session is 40 minutes,
[Amit Varma]: people will listen to an episode in multiple sessions and all of that, the level of engagement
[Amit Varma]: is far greater. And that translates to a much deeper sort of involvement, not just with
[Amit Varma]: the podcaster with whom you'll often feel this intimate connection, because you have
[Amit Varma]: their voice in your head all the time. But also, you know, all the rabbit holes you enter
[Amit Varma]: because of them.
[Guest]: No, I think maybe you've got me thinking, I think maybe you're right, maybe I'm falling
[Guest]: into the trap of looking at YouTube and Twitter, and taking this superficial view of the loudest
[Guest]: parts of social media. And that there is something going on there, like say your podcast, other
[Guest]: long form podcasts, which show that it's wrong to just look at the loudest voice in the room,
[Guest]: look at the voice that people remember. So yeah, you're absolutely right. I will rethink
[Guest]: this one.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, let's let's and we'll come to the media because I'd love your insights on many other
[Amit Varma]: aspects of it. But before that, let's continue your personal journey, which we keep getting
[Amit Varma]: sidetracked from because I keep digressing. A really fascinating part of your book is
[Amit Varma]: that after your dad died, you actually put yourself in school in the sense you went through
[Amit Varma]: the application process, you found yourself a school, you then found yourself college
[Amit Varma]: going to Oxford and everything. Tell me sort of about how that period was like, like at
[Amit Varma]: that point, what is your conception of yourself? When you put yourself through that grind through
[Amit Varma]: that education, you go to Oxford, you do a PPE. And you earlier pointed out that, you
[Amit Varma]: know, a lot of British Prime Ministers are still elites. And there is a traditional cliche
[Amit Varma]: about how all British Prime Ministers have done the PPE. I think Johnson also must have
[Amit Varma]: done the PPE. So perhaps you knew many prominent politicians personally. But at that point
[Amit Varma]: in time, when you're putting yourself through that, you obviously you're not, you know,
[Amit Varma]: a lot of what happens to you later seems to be serendipity. So what is your conception
[Amit Varma]: of yourself at that point? What is it that you want to be and where do you want to go?
[Guest]: Well, you know, my father had always said that I should go to a British university.
[Guest]: And I think it may be because he went to Elphinstone College in Bombay. And he was very keen that
[Guest]: his son would have some of the advantages he didn't have. So it had been taken for granted
[Guest]: that I would go abroad to study, that I would go to an English university. What none of
[Guest]: us realized, I don't think he realized it either, was that you couldn't go, I couldn't
[Guest]: finish at Mayo and then go to university. When all my friends went to colleges in India,
[Guest]: you had to go and do two years of school first and do what, I don't know if it's still the
[Guest]: same, were called A-levels. And that was complicated because I had to do this in a boarding school
[Guest]: and I didn't know how to organize it. So I went out and there was nobody else to do it
[Guest]: for me. So I went out and bought this book called the Public Schools Handbook, which
[Guest]: I don't know if they're still published, probably on the net now. And I made a list of schools
[Guest]: that were near London because I didn't want to go to a very conservative school because
[Guest]: all my friends were in college anyway. So I found this one, which was 20 minutes on
[Guest]: the tube from the center of London and was large and seemed quite cool. So I wrote off
[Guest]: to it as I had written off to many other schools. And then I finally called and they were very
[Guest]: sniffy and they said, people have registered for so many years and your term begins in
[Guest]: October, we're already in April. And it was just my good luck, I think I've just right
[Guest]: place, right time. Good luck. I found a principal who was willing to listen to me. He said,
[Guest]: come and see me. He came and I went and saw him. He had me interviewed by the head of
[Guest]: his history department and the head of his English department. English department was
[Guest]: fine. The history department, I sort of did a bit of jugaad. I said, I've only studied
[Guest]: Indian history. So he had to ask me questions about Indian history, which he was not good
[Guest]: at. So I could have said anything. I could have said Akbar was Baba's father and I would
[Guest]: have got away with it. But they agreed to admit me on the spot, which I thought was
[Guest]: really, really cool. It doesn't happen even in India. It was just a principal there was
[Guest]: willing to take a chance on somebody from outside. And it's probably because I went
[Guest]: to that school that I got a sense of being able to fit into England without ever fitting
[Guest]: in, in the sense that it wasn't Eton or it wasn't Harrow. Harrow was one of the other
[Guest]: options because it was near London. Eton was Windsor, so which is not far from London.
[Guest]: So those were options, but somehow I didn't actually want to go to Eton and wear a tailcoat
[Guest]: and a mortarboard and a white bow tie. And I didn't want to go to Harrow and be part
[Guest]: of some glorious English tradition, which I have nothing in common with. So this suited
[Guest]: my purposes. That was a school that was liberal, that was happy to have me, that was near enough
[Guest]: London and I had a great time. And I think I learned, I mean, I dare I say this, I learned
[Guest]: more at that school than I learned at Oxford. In Oxford, because the system then was that
[Guest]: you had tutorials in which you wrote an article or an essay and your tutor disagreed with
[Guest]: you or agreed with you and made you defend that essay. I think I learned how to write,
[Guest]: oddly enough, and I learned how to argue. PP, which you mentioned that all politicians
[Guest]: do is less a degree than a flag of convenience for people who want to do other things while
[Guest]: they're at Oxford. So I was not overly academic at Oxford. I did economics, I did all kinds
[Guest]: of politics, most of which I don't remember. But what I do remember is the arguments with
[Guest]: tutors, the way in which you take apart somebody's argument, the way in which you construct an
[Guest]: argument. And you are you asking about how I write and whether I've always written like
[Guest]: that? I think I write like that because of the training of those years, though I was
[Guest]: doing academic essays, I was taught, and I think I say this to everybody, when you write,
[Guest]: it isn't how you write. It isn't the big words or the complicated constructions. It is the
[Guest]: ideas. Ultimately, all articles or all essays are vehicles for ideas. So unless you have
[Guest]: at least one idea in your thing, and you are able to get it across, there's no point writing
[Guest]: an article. I mean, unfortunately, many of us try and make things that are clever or
[Guest]: that are funny or that are witty. Just try to simply get the idea across and you're done.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, and there's a fascinating part of your book where you're interviewing for a college
[Amit Varma]: in Oxford and you point out how your interviewer asks you, so would you say you were a Keynesian
[Amit Varma]: or a monetarist, Mr. Sanghvi? And your reply is, my teachers are Keynesians. I have no
[Amit Varma]: strong views on the subject. I am hoping to make up my own mind once I get here and discuss
[Amit Varma]: it with economists like you. On the one hand, it's obviously a very, you know, a practical
[Amit Varma]: and jugaroo answer where, you know, you're not pushed into a corner. But also, you know,
[Amit Varma]: it indicates a bent of mind where you're careful at arriving at worldviews. So what was your
[Amit Varma]: journey towards forming a worldview? Because I think what often happens in one's teenage
[Amit Varma]: years is that you are entranced by the seductive appeal of simple ideas which seem to explain
[Amit Varma]: everything. And simple ideas can explain everything in a wrong way also, you know, and the world
[Amit Varma]: is much more complex than that. And it is over a period of time that you start figuring
[Amit Varma]: that out. So what was your process like of arriving at worldviews? Did you change your
[Amit Varma]: mind? Were there significant ways in which you changed your mind? And also, this also
[Amit Varma]: strikes me as important because all this is your schooling, your college is happening
[Amit Varma]: through the 70s at a time where, you know, India is going deeper and deeper into a form
[Amit Varma]: of statism that is harming the economy, that is harming society, all of those things. So
[Amit Varma]: not only are you sort of being educated in a universe of ideas, but you're also looking
[Amit Varma]: at your own country from the outside, and therefore are not sort of hostage to the received
[Amit Varma]: wisdom of the time as you might have been in India. So what is sort of this process
[Amit Varma]: like of discovering what you think and how you think and then how you view India?
[Guest]: That's actually a very, very interesting question. Because I mean, in terms of the Keynesian
[Guest]: and monetarist thing, it was simple. I recognize the question for what it was. It was an invitation
[Guest]: to enter a trap. If I said, no, I am a Keynesian, he would have said, but Keynes has said this,
[Guest]: and Keynes has been wrong on this. So how would you define? I had no effing clue of
[Guest]: what Keynes had said or whatever. So the best thing to do was to give, as you say, this
[Guest]: Jugaadu answer and not be led into that trap. On a more serious note about how I looked
[Guest]: at India, I don't know if it's still true. I suppose it is still true that whenever any
[Guest]: Indian is abroad, he or she becomes a hyper patriot. You go and people criticize India,
[Guest]: and then you feel bad that they're criticizing India, and you look for ways to defend your
[Guest]: country. And in the 70s, not that many British people knew that much about India. They thought
[Guest]: we were a poor and primitive country and were astonished to find someone like me who could
[Guest]: maybe hold my own with them, could speak English as well as them or whatever. And so that made
[Guest]: me, I think, some kind of super patriot in a way that I perhaps wouldn't have been if
[Guest]: I wasn't at home, a sort of my country, right or wrong. And that lasted, I think, until
[Guest]: 76. In 75, when Mrs. Gandhi declared the emergency, and the whole world condemned it, I was actually
[Guest]: really shocked. It never occurred to me that there could be press censorship in India,
[Guest]: that the entire opposition could be locked up, all basically say one woman's share. But
[Guest]: when people started criticizing India and criticizing the emergency, there was some
[Guest]: knee jerk response, where I felt obliged to defend the emergency. And to say it wasn't
[Guest]: such a bad thing. And you have to look at what's happening in India. And I mean, really
[Guest]: pathetic arguments in defense of what was probably indefensible. And then in 76, I came
[Guest]: back to India in my gap year. And I spent some time and that was the same time as the
[Guest]: rise of the notorious Mr. Sanjay Gandhi. And anybody who had any sympathy for Indira Gandhi
[Guest]: during that period, lost it. Because this thug like motor mechanic son of hers could
[Guest]: not be imposed on the country as her successor. So when I went back to England, I was in this
[Guest]: extraordinary position, where I still felt I was obliged to defend India. And yet, I
[Guest]: did not feel I could defend what was happening in India. So I walked the sort of middle path.
[Guest]: You must remember also, I've written that in the book, that I came from a progressive
[Guest]: background. My father was a communist, even when he abandoned communism, and communism
[Guest]: abandoned him. He still had this progressive, vaguely lefty view of the world, illogical
[Guest]: that might have been, but it was still a lefty view. It came from a lefty place. And as Mrs.
[Guest]: Gandhi had framed the emergency in terms of fighting vested interests, and I'd believed
[Guest]: in 1971, when Mrs. Gandhi split the Congress and won a mandate for herself, that this was
[Guest]: a good thing for India, vested interests, the syndicate had been defeated. And staying
[Guest]: away and having some sense of distance and looking at what was happening, gave me an
[Guest]: interesting perspective. I stopped defending what was happening in India, with quite the
[Guest]: same enthusiasm. And I began looking at what Mrs. Gandhi was doing, and being horrified.
[Guest]: And then when Janata was elected, I thought it was a great thing, Janata government would
[Guest]: last forever. We had a paper in, at Oxford, I did one, which is called the politics of
[Guest]: developing countries. And one of my teachers, a guy who taught me South Asian politics,
[Guest]: a man called Gopalakrishnan, Dr. Gopalakrishnan, and his view was that Janata would last forever.
[Guest]: Basically political science is a way of doing journalism with big words. So it was like
[Guest]: the Kulaks, who are the local notables, who had been sidelined by Indira Gandhi, have come together
[Guest]: and formed the Janata party, and they have roots in the villages that Mrs. Gandhi doesn't,
[Guest]: and this kind of crap. And I remember, I was quite taken in by it, I have to say, though
[Guest]: I call it crap now, that one of the papers I did in my finals, the question is, the developing
[Guest]: countries was, there is no reason to believe that Janata is any more than a nine day wonder
[Guest]: in the history of Indian politics. And of course, I gave him the whole Gopalakrishnan
[Guest]: thesis that Janata will go on forever, and there is no problem. And I took my exam, and
[Guest]: I went back to India, and the Janata government fell. And then I was called back to Oxford
[Guest]: for a viva, which is what you get when you say, not good enough for a first, but slightly
[Guest]: better than a second, then they talk to you and decide whether you're really worth the
[Guest]: first. So they asked me then to defend this question. And there was no way I could defend
[Guest]: it. And that was the end of my first division. I went back with the second division. But
[Guest]: yes, you're right. If you have that perspective, and you look at India, and you've been brought
[Guest]: up to be broadly sympathetic of what Indira Gandhi was doing, that whole emergency period
[Guest]: made you look at India differently. It made you look at what was happening. Nobody was
[Guest]: thrilled about the RSS joining, or the Jansan joining the government. But you kept thinking
[Guest]: that the Congress can't run the government forever. There has to be some alternative.
[Guest]: And when there wasn't, when Mrs. Janata collapsed, and when Mrs. Gandhi was re-elected, I remember
[Guest]: being profoundly depressed.
[Amit Varma]: So take me through your early years in journalism, because even while you were still in college,
[Amit Varma]: you kind of became a journalist, you became an editor at one point where, you know, first
[Amit Varma]: you start with the India Today group, then you talk about how you set up their magazine
[Amit Varma]: Bombay in Bombay. So tell me a little bit about that, because is that something that
[Amit Varma]: you had given thought to about journalism itself, what it involved, what it implied?
[Guest]: I was very clear that I wouldn't be a journalist, which is why, though various job offers, Inder
[Guest]: Malhotra, who was a friend of my parents, had suggested I join the Times of India, which
[Guest]: he was an assistant editor at the time. Various people had done it. And I don't know if you
[Guest]: remember what papers were like in those days. But if you were an assistant editor at one
[Guest]: of the big newspapers, it meant you got a cabin, you got paid quite well. And you sat
[Guest]: in there and you wrote these leaders, these editorial page articles, and then you went
[Guest]: home.
[Guest]: And you really had nothing to do with the famous story, which I'm sure is untrue, about
[Guest]: Shyamlal, who was a legendary editor of the Times of India, going out to a gathering and
[Guest]: meeting a man who said lots of things. And Shyamlal was very impressed. And he said to
[Guest]: the man, you seem very well-informed. What do you do? And this chap said, sir, I'm your
[Guest]: news editor. But that is the extent to which the news side and the editorial side would
[Guest]: divorce from each other in those days. And the guys who wrote the editorials looked down
[Guest]: the chap who actually did the journalism, who actually produced the newspaper.
[Guest]: So I rejected that option of becoming that kind of editorial page writer. As I say in
[Guest]: the book, writing for India Today happened because they were desperate. There was nobody
[Guest]: to write for them. I was unemployed. I was there waiting to go up to Oxford. And I was
[Guest]: cheap and I was young and I was bushy. And I was able to get them interviews and nobody
[Guest]: else would. And then they kept at it. So if that had not happened to me, if I hadn't kept
[Guest]: up with India Today, then I think I probably would never have become a journalist.
[Amit Varma]: And at this point, how does one form a conception of good journalism? Where are the role models?
[Amit Varma]: Because in India, journalism, I have actual memories of journalism only from the 80s,
[Amit Varma]: but it was horrendous. It was so bad. So what are your role models? How do you arrive at
[Amit Varma]: a set of values in terms of what you do in your reporting? How do you arrive at a set
[Amit Varma]: of values about the language itself, which I remember as being incredibly poor even in
[Amit Varma]: the 80s and the 90s. And you also described in your book at different times in Sunday
[Amit Varma]: and Hindustan Times. Yeah, it was it was so horrendous. I mean, you mentioned how the
[Amit Varma]: Hindustan Times was described by people as an English paper written in Punjabi.
[Guest]: I mean, yeah, I searched for an answer to that question because there were very successful
[Guest]: journalists in my early years. It was Arun Shourie who invented investigative journalism
[Guest]: for India. There was M.J. Akbar, who with the original Sunday was a firebrand editor
[Guest]: who created a new kind of journalism. So there were these people, but almost all of them
[Guest]: were people who took a position. Now, we talk about Ram Nath Goenka and we talk about his
[Guest]: battles with the government. And I knew Ram Nath Goenka quite well. There was no doubt
[Guest]: that even as he was fighting with the government or whatever, he was doing it from a particular
[Guest]: political position. He was committed to destroying the Congress and helping his friends in the
[Guest]: opposition come to power. If you went to his penthouse, which I did, you met people like
[Guest]: Guru Murthy, who was then just an RSS guy, and various other opposition, Mrs. Sindhia,
[Guest]: Mrs. Vijayraja Sindhia, who would all sit and complain about the Gandhi's and what they
[Guest]: could do, how they could change things. And afterwards, when he turned against Rajiv and
[Guest]: against Zerubai Ambani, it would be full of those plots. So, I mean, I liked him a lot
[Guest]: and I admired him enormously. But this was, was this a role model? I don't know. It was
[Guest]: journalism done with a purpose to achieve a purpose. So should journalism be done by
[Guest]: that? Or should it be much more neutral or much more open? Akbar, for instance, his the
[Guest]: slogan he chose for his Sunday, I think it was, was strong views strongly expressed.
[Guest]: He was very clear which side he was on. So I was a little uncomfortable with all of these
[Guest]: obvious role models. There was much to admire in them. And I did admire them. But they did
[Guest]: not seem to me to fit what I wanted to do. I wanted to write about things. I mean, you
[Guest]: will have a certain bias, because you will be biased towards liberal values or whatever,
[Guest]: but not a sort of party political bias. I want to write about things generally. And
[Guest]: Arun Puri, in many ways, came closest to that, because I started my career, working for India
[Guest]: today. And Arun was a printer, he had no experience with journalism. And when he got into it,
[Guest]: he just read and read. And he evolved a way of doing things. There used to be a series
[Guest]: of books by Harrod Evans on being a journalist, one of which was called Newsman's English,
[Guest]: which Arun made all of us read. Another one on photojournalism was called Pictures on
[Guest]: a Page, how you use photographs. Arun made all of us read that. His idea was always don't
[Guest]: look for role models in India. Try and learn from the best in the world. And I think to
[Amit Varma]: some extent, I went with him.
[Amit Varma]: And you sort of brought up the normative question of, you know, in a rhetorical sense, you asked,
[Amit Varma]: is this what journalism should be? And that leads me to a question of what should journalism
[Amit Varma]: be? Because on the one hand, you know, we have talks about the ethical values of journalism
[Amit Varma]: that you speak truth to power and, you know, you afflict the comfortable and comfort the
[Amit Varma]: afflicted and all of those cliches. And these are the values separation of news and opinion
[Amit Varma]: and so on and so forth. At the same time, you have these imperatives, which often drive
[Amit Varma]: businesses in undeniable ways, such as just a profit motive, or you could be in a country,
[Amit Varma]: for example, where a government can put an enormous amount of pressure on you and that
[Amit Varma]: becomes an imperative. There are the individual incentives of journalists themselves. So when
[Amit Varma]: we speak of sort of the higher ethical values of journalism, much as you know, the Hippocratic
[Amit Varma]: Oath is for doctors, is there something to that or are we fooling ourselves?
[Guest]: Yeah, look, in an ideal world, everybody would want those absolute ethical values to be maintained
[Guest]: by every publication. But in the real world, journalism is always a high wire act, or a
[Guest]: trapeze act. Because there are always in any newspaper or publication, so many different
[Guest]: interests. There's the government, which is nearly always putting pressure on you. There
[Guest]: is the owner. And in India, we don't have corporate ownership as much as individual
[Guest]: ownership. Owners nearly always want the papers to be seen as their papers. So you have to
[Guest]: keep that you have to maintain that you have often the owner's commercial interests. Because
[Guest]: most people in the business also have other interests, which they are not willing to endanger
[Guest]: just because you want to write a column. So you have to worry about that. You also increasingly,
[Guest]: and the Times of India was a good example, because I joined it because the owners never
[Guest]: wanted to be high profile. They had no political loyalties. They tried to produce a paper that
[Guest]: was free of any kind of bias. And yet you had then internally another kind of trapeze
[Guest]: act, because they saw the paper not as a means of fulfilling some higher social obligation,
[Guest]: but as a business. Asked by the New Yorker a decade ago, about what he did, Vineeth Jain
[Guest]: said, we are in the advertising business. The Times of India was very clear that it
[Guest]: existed because advertisers needed a medium to reach readers. And the Times of India provided
[Guest]: that medium. If along the way it could bring enlightenment and entertainment on that, that's
[Guest]: very good. But there was never any doubt about what its primary purpose was. I mean, if the
[Guest]: ad department calls the shots, then is that still this high ethical form of journalism?
[Guest]: So because there are so many competing pressures, some internal, some external, all journalism
[Guest]: ultimately is a trapeze act, a high wire act. You get in there, you try and tell the truth,
[Guest]: you try and write the truth, but you can, it's never an absolute thing. You can never
[Guest]: succeed all the time. You do the best you can.
[Amit Varma]: There's this amusing anecdote in your book about, you know, when Narsimha Rao was prime minister
[Amit Varma]: at one point, you know, when you were in Sunday, you wrote, quote, the key to understanding
[Amit Varma]: Narsimha Rao lies in recognizing that he is a small time manipulator who masquerades as
[Amit Varma]: a statesman. Stop quote.
[Guest]: Yes, indeed. Yes. First line and the very first counterpoint I wrote.
[Amit Varma]: And then, you know, your publisher, Avik Sarkar, you know, wants something out of Narsimha Rao
[Amit Varma]: when he goes to Delhi and Narsimha Rao saying, why have you come to me? I am a small time
[Amit Varma]: manipulator, some passive aggressive thing like that. So that's sort of a classic example.
[Amit Varma]: You've also given a good breakdown of how the newspaper model, instead of being subscription
[Amit Varma]: driven became advertising driven. So you could basically give it away for close to free,
[Amit Varma]: but you were catering to the lowest common denominator and you just wanted.
[Guest]: And to the interest of the advertisers. Because your ultimate customer was not your reader.
[Amit Varma]: It was the advertiser.
[Amit Varma]: It was the advertiser. Exactly. And the other thing that strikes me here is that when I
[Amit Varma]: look at modern times, for example, it strikes me that a lot of the dissenting voices in
[Amit Varma]: today's journalism in India are small independent folks, you know, who haven't been around for
[Amit Varma]: that long, which brings to mind that old line from rock and roll, if you ain't got nothing,
[Amit Varma]: you got nothing to lose. I think it was Dylan. So, you know, the scrolls and the wires and
[Amit Varma]: all of that might take their dissenting lines because they are small, whatever. But when
[Amit Varma]: you look at the larger newspapers, they're not just standalone newspapers. They're part
[Amit Varma]: of industrial houses. Somebody who's running a newspaper could be running a chemical factory.
[Amit Varma]: And if the government of the day does an IT raid there, there's just too much to lose.
[Amit Varma]: There's too much at stake. So at some level, you almost understand that there's a fear
[Amit Varma]: of the stake. And then there is also the carrot. If you're an industrial house, which owns
[Amit Varma]: certain publications or media houses, obviously you're incentivized to stay with the government
[Amit Varma]: line to push those narratives to not cross certain boundaries. Do you see some truth
[Guest]: to this?
[Guest]: No, absolutely. Without a doubt. I think if a government wants to put pressure on the
[Guest]: newspaper house, it can do it without any talk of censorship or whatever. All it needs
[Guest]: to do is to ensure that the business interests of the owner are not favoured, that permissions
[Guest]: are not given, that say a pollution inquiry is started. I mean, everybody did this. I
[Guest]: remember during the Vajpayee government, the owner of Outlook had many investigations started
[Guest]: on him. They didn't touch Outlook because, of course, they respected the freedom of the
[Guest]: press, but they went for the proprietor. And ultimately, as Vinod Mehta, my friend, writes
[Guest]: in his autobiography, it had to have some impact. He doesn't like hanging around in
[Guest]: enforcement directorate offices, that smell of urine, being kept waiting for hours, being
[Guest]: humiliated. And he begins to wonder, why am I letting my editors have so much freedom?
[Guest]: What am I getting out of it? So yes, all governments, at some level, put pressure on journalists.
[Guest]: And often this pressure comes through their proprietors.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, I mean, just looking back in the past decades, and I'm obviously not privy
[Amit Varma]: to the inside story of what happened. But you see this in different governments, like
[Amit Varma]: in the UPA time, you see Raju Naresh Satti, you know, leaving Mint because apparently
[Amit Varma]: Chidambaram, who was then finance minister, got upset at something. Similarly, later,
[Amit Varma]: you have, you know, Bobby Ghosh having to leave as editor of the HD because Arun Jaitley
[Amit Varma]: reportedly got upset at something. You know, are there incidents that you feel free to
[Amit Varma]: talk about of this sort that have happened in the past that kind of illustrate this?
[Guest]: Well, the HD examples are a problem for me because I cannot divulge what either of any
[Guest]: of the principles have told me. But I mean, it goes far back. Prem Shankar Jha, I think
[Guest]: had to leave the HD because Rajiv Gandhi objected to something he had told VP Singh, and we're
[Guest]: sticking with the HD, without things that I was personally privy to. Khushwant Singh
[Guest]: was appointed, KK Birla writes in his own autobiography, by Sanjay Gandhi, who said
[Guest]: to him that, I hear you have vacancy for an editor. And he said, Yes, I do. And he said,
[Guest]: Okay, I have a candidate for you. And so KK Birla says who? And he said, Meneka. And so
[Guest]: even KK Birla finds that this is a bit much to bear. So he thinks, he goes away and thinks
[Guest]: about it says he will think about it comes back and he says, I'm sorry, I don't think
[Guest]: this will work. Fine, Sanjay, appoint Khushwant Singh. And Khushwant Singh is promptly appointed.
[Guest]: I mean, that happened all the time in newspapers during that era.
[Amit Varma]: So is it the case and this might seem a pessimistic view that is it the case that those who are
[Amit Varma]: dissenting today are able to do so because they are too small, no one really cares about
[Amit Varma]: them that if they get beyond a certain level of influence, say if they're right outside
[Amit Varma]: the elites, they'll just be struck down. And there are so many tools.
[Guest]: Look at the wire, which is so one of the dissenting voices, they've done everything possible they
[Guest]: can to try and shut the wire down. There have been all kinds of cases, there have been investigations,
[Guest]: look at NDTV, which isn't even a particular dissenter or whatever, the kind of ordeal
[Guest]: it's had to go through. So sometimes if you're lucky, and you're strong, you survive the
[Guest]: ire of the government, most times you decide it's not worth it.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, that's a note of hope. And of course, the wire has been leading the way with the
[Amit Varma]: Pegasus revelations, for example, very bravely, Danik Bhaskar just got raided, and they've
[Guest]: sort of been...
[Guest]: Everybody kept saying when Danik Bhaskar was doing those COVID stories, how do they hope
[Guest]: to get away with it? And the answer was, they were waiting for the COVID crisis to pass
[Guest]: and for the government to seem on a stronger wicket before coming down on them. And now
[Guest]: they have.
[Amit Varma]: Amazing. Let's sort of talk about the changing media landscape over this entire time. Like
[Amit Varma]: one thing that was certainly true till the end of the 90s, maybe even for the first few
[Amit Varma]: years of this millennium was that there was something called mainstream media, there was
[Amit Varma]: a consensus on the truth that, you know, you might have different papers have different
[Amit Varma]: characters in some small ways, but broadly, there is a consensus on the truth on what's
[Amit Varma]: going on. And most people are getting their information, their knowledge from a small
[Amit Varma]: set of sources. Today, that's completely splintered. Now, one, it's a good thing that is splintered,
[Amit Varma]: because you know, with the means of production becoming available to anyone, more and more
[Amit Varma]: people can enter the fray as creators, as indeed I have with my blog earlier in the
[Amit Varma]: podcast today. But the other side to that is that then there, a lot of that consensus
[Amit Varma]: on the truth has vanished, that nothing is mainstream anymore, everything is splintered.
[Amit Varma]: Like, just yesterday, I read this interview of Steve Van Zandt, who was a founding guitarist
[Amit Varma]: of the E Street Band with Bruce Springsteen, Little Steven. Yeah. And Van Zandt was saying
[Amit Varma]: in that that rock is no longer mainstream. And his point was that rock becoming mainstream
[Amit Varma]: was an aberration. It began when Dylan went electric, according to him, and it ended when,
[Amit Varma]: you know, Kurt Cobain killed himself. And whatever the timelines might be, I mean, obviously,
[Amit Varma]: they're gradual processes. But his point was that rock is not mainstream. And when I think
[Amit Varma]: about that, nothing in music is mainstream, whether in, you know, to entertainment to
[Amit Varma]: some extent, because the means of distribution has still haven't opened up, even if the means
[Amit Varma]: of production have, there is something called a mainstream and whatever. But in media, there
[Amit Varma]: probably isn't. If anything, there are platforms that are mainstream, like a YouTube or a Twitter
[Amit Varma]: or a Facebook or whatever. But the conception of the mainstream is changing, people get
[Amit Varma]: their information from different sources and all of that. Now, the significant chunk of
[Amit Varma]: your career was spent within institutions, which were sort of mainstream institutions
[Amit Varma]: doing traditional things. And the landscape has so completely changed, sort of in the
[Amit Varma]: last 10 years. So, you know, has this made you redefine, has this made you rethink rather,
[Amit Varma]: the things that you do, the things that you want to do, the kind of things that give you
[Guest]: satisfaction? Yeah, I mean, I think all of us have had to find ways of adjusting to the
[Guest]: changing medium. So while I do, I do the root food column for the Hindustan Times branch,
[Guest]: my political column appears on ht.com, and reaches many, many more people than it would
[Guest]: have in many, many parts of the world than if it just appeared in a print thing. So I've
[Guest]: tried as much as possible to do things that are accessible to people in a variety of ways.
[Guest]: I started my own YouTube channel about eight years ago. I think it was too early, I was
[Guest]: just crap on YouTube. So the channel wasn't a great success. But I've tried very hard
[Guest]: to get into that. I started my own website where everything I write about, where everything
[Guest]: I write, appears in 2008, which I think was slightly ahead of the curve. So I've tried
[Guest]: to keep up as much as possible with changing media. I find now that my online stuff usually
[Guest]: gets much more noticed, has much more impact than something I would write, say, on the
[Guest]: editorial page of a newspaper, or as a column in a magazine. So you try, I think, to adjust
[Guest]: to different ways of getting your message across. A lot of the stuff I've done on television,
[Guest]: I think, works best, because we will no longer watch television that much in real time, works
[Guest]: best in YouTube or stuff like that. One of the things I run, I'm a founder of, is a company
[Guest]: called Easy Diner, which is an online restaurant platform, which is based on the internet,
[Guest]: where you can do your bookings and all of that on the internet. So I think probably
[Guest]: earlier than most journalists, I embraced the internet and the sense in which things
[Guest]: had changed. Have I started an all proper internet venture of my own, whatever? No.
[Guest]: Would I have, apart from the Easy Diner within mainstream journalism, would I have if I was
[Guest]: 15 years younger? I think I would almost certainly have done it. But when you're 65, you have
[Guest]: less and less urge to set up new organizations, to manage teams of people, etc. You're much
[Guest]: happier being the sort of position I am, where I anchor television shows, and I write books,
[Guest]: and I do columns, and nice people like you invite me to come on and hold forth. But yes,
[Guest]: I would have done things very differently if I was younger.
[Amit Varma]: So a couple of questions, which I think are actually the same question. And the first
[Amit Varma]: one is that, does the media then need to consider the way that it does everything? Because it
[Amit Varma]: seems to me that, you know, whenever change happens, there is a lag between the change
[Amit Varma]: actually happening, and traditional corporations kind of figuring out what the change is and
[Amit Varma]: how to deal with it. For example, I think, you know, a lot of the newspapers, people,
[Amit Varma]: they get the circulation because of inertia. Ki ghar pe aata hai, and therefore, you know,
[Amit Varma]: you may not even look at it, but you have your three, four newspapers coming every day.
[Amit Varma]: And that's kind of it. But as we discussed earlier, the way people discover content,
[Amit Varma]: filter content, consume content has changed completely. And it seems to me that none of
[Amit Varma]: the traditional media houses have really figured that out. You know, they will have a checklist
[Amit Varma]: of things they will do where they can tick boxes like Instagram pe presence hona chahiye,
[Amit Varma]: have a Twitter presence, have a this presence, do, you know, stories on Instagram, all of
[Amit Varma]: that. But they haven't really adopted their fundamental ways of working. And the second
[Amit Varma]: question which feeds into this is, if you were 15 years younger, or 20 years younger,
[Amit Varma]: or 25 years younger, what would you start? What are the learnings about the media landscape
[Amit Varma]: and about society which you would incorporate into starting something in the media today?
[Guest]: It is true. Three answers to the question. The first one, is it a good thing that the
[Guest]: media landscape is fractured? And there aren't just this oligopolistic control of a few media
[Guest]: houses? Yes, I think absolutely. I used to always say, about India, that freedom of the
[Guest]: press is guaranteed to anyone who happens to own one. But the point is now, unlike then,
[Guest]: you don't have to own one, there are ways of getting your message across. So that's
[Guest]: a good thing. The bad part of it is for better or for worse, most traditional media had certain
[Guest]: norms in the way in which information was checked, in the way you tried to do things
[Guest]: that were responsible. In a splintered landscape, there will always be people who will do things
[Guest]: without any of these checks and filters, who will do things for clickbait. So you have
[Guest]: to balance out the advantage and the disadvantage. That's one question. The second one on what
[Guest]: I would do, if I was 15 years younger, I would almost certainly have started an opinion website.
[Guest]: I think there is a need for an opinion website. Many people tell me that the internet, only
[Guest]: an investigator website or a website that tells people something they don't know would
[Guest]: work. I don't know if that's true. But I genuinely think that the level of commentary
[Guest]: in newspapers has sunk pretty low. That in many cases, because people are scared of getting
[Guest]: commentators who will say things that are unpopular or whatever, they fall back on the
[Guest]: coward's option of getting academics to write vaguely obscure articles on their specialities.
[Guest]: I have nothing against academics writing articles that they write very well. But when it is
[Guest]: done to avoid getting proper commentators to comment on current events, then I don't
[Guest]: think it works that well. So I still think that there is room for a website that had
[Guest]: a lot of opinion. Your third question about newspapers and the web. Yeah, I think almost
[Guest]: all newspapers in India realized 20 years ago that the internet was going to be the
[Guest]: next big thing. Almost all of them started newspaper sites and almost websites and nearly
[Guest]: all of them screwed it up. I think there is something in their mentality that stops them
[Guest]: from understanding. I know that traditional, I mean, I've heard, because we've been around
[Guest]: so long, I've heard so much crap about integrated newsroom and a guy will come in and he will
[Guest]: go straight to our radio station and he will talk about it. Then he will do a piece to
[Guest]: camera. Then he'll come back and he'll write the story for the internet. And then the evening
[Guest]: he'll file for the newspaper. I mean, millions have been invested in these ventures. Nothing
[Guest]: has ever come of it. As far as I know, no newspaper organization in India has succeeded
[Guest]: doing anything like it. Abroad, papers like the New York Times have had much more success
[Guest]: doing things like this. I pay a subscription to read the New York Times on the net every
[Guest]: day. Would I necessarily pay the same subscription for an Indian newspaper? I don't know. I don't
[Guest]: think so. There's never that kind of content that strikes me as being unusual or worth
[Guest]: reading. Among Indian news sites, the one I would probably subscribe to, though fortunately
[Guest]: it's free, is the NDTV app because that does tell you pretty much everything you need to
[Guest]: know quite quickly. In fact, when I've often been a guest on various news discussion shows,
[Guest]: I've quickly cogged and seen what the NDTV app is saying about 10 points about the budget
[Guest]: or whatever. So I can seem clever and knowledgeable. So yes, some things have that work, but nothing
[Guest]: that anything, nothing on the net that anybody in mainstream media has done that I can think
[Guest]: of at all impressed me. It's a case of vast organizations throwing vast resources at the
[Guest]: vast world and coming up with nothing.
[Amit Varma]: No, that's very well put. And I agree completely. And it's interesting that you said an opinion
[Amit Varma]: website because I think that one thing that people do hunger for in this age of ubiquitous
[Amit Varma]: knowledge all around them, one thing that they do hunger for is perspectives. And I'm
[Amit Varma]: reminded of this shout out to my friend Shaquille who keeps telling me that I should start something
[Amit Varma]: like Persuasion, which is a newsletter magazine of sorts started by Yasha Monk in the US.
[Amit Varma]: And they've got a bunch of great writers for them. The other thing, and I'll just kind
[Amit Varma]: of think aloud and share my thoughts on it and tell me if this is something that has
[Amit Varma]: struck you because it's something that kind of took me by surprise is the sort of intimacy
[Amit Varma]: that a new content creators can now find. For example, here's a metaphor, let's say
[Amit Varma]: you are, and I'll start with the visual arts, let's say you're in a cinema theatre and you're
[Amit Varma]: watching a movie, and the screen is a certain distance away from you. And similarly, the
[Amit Varma]: camera is a certain distance away from the actors, somebody's coming in on horseback
[Amit Varma]: and then you get closer or whatever. If you make it a little more intimate, you have a
[Amit Varma]: television screen, it's a couple of meters away from you. And the camera is also a couple
[Amit Varma]: of meters away from the actors. So you'll have friends and Seinfeld and people in flats
[Amit Varma]: and all that. YouTube brings it even closer, where you're sitting in front of a laptop
[Amit Varma]: screen, which is a few inches away. And similarly, a lot of made for YouTube content is that
[Amit Varma]: close and that personal. Now, I got to thinking about this when I sort of took this to audio.
[Amit Varma]: And I thought about how podcasts are different from radio like it is not true that podcasts
[Amit Varma]: are only on demand radio in terms of access, that is true. But a fundamental way in which
[Amit Varma]: this is differences radio because of all different kinds of incentives and imperatives has to
[Amit Varma]: kind of go broad. So I think of radio, I think of driving in a car and the radio is on and
[Amit Varma]: there's a song on and there's a limit to how deep you can go. When people speak, they will
[Amit Varma]: speak in these artificial broadcast devices, they will project and so on and so forth.
[Amit Varma]: But podcasting is intimate, there is someone's voice inside your head. And it's very personal.
[Amit Varma]: And it's something I realized when gradually as my podcast grew, I began to realize almost
[Amit Varma]: with a shock, how seriously people sort of take this relationship. And I'm starting with
[Amit Varma]: my own example. But this is true of a lot of creators in the creator economy, not just
[Amit Varma]: in podcasts, but also on YouTube, where everything, in a sense, feels very personal, there is
[Amit Varma]: a personal connect that wasn't there earlier. So earlier, if you enter television, you know,
[Amit Varma]: you have to learn certain skills of presenting yourself or what talking or whatever. If you
[Amit Varma]: get into say journalism, you have to learn the house style or whatever publication you're
[Amit Varma]: writing for. But if you are a blogger, or if you are a podcaster, or if you are a YouTuber,
[Amit Varma]: any of these intimate mediums, you just have to be yourself. And that to me is incredibly
[Amit Varma]: fascinating, incredibly liberating. And I sort of thought of this also in a different
[Amit Varma]: context where in your book, you speak about how one of the reasons Amitabh may have sort
[Amit Varma]: of felt drawn to go into politics besides his close friendship with Rajiv and the sentimental
[Amit Varma]: attachment and all of that was that when he had his accident in 1982, when he was so ill,
[Amit Varma]: you point out how he was stunned by the amount of love and adoration that people have for
[Amit Varma]: him. And it's and that's love and adoration at a distance where you're building temples
[Amit Varma]: for someone. But there's something much more intimate about this new creator media, which
[Amit Varma]: is something I've only started thinking about in the last couple of years, because by accident,
[Amit Varma]: I find myself in the, you know, in the thick of things. Is that something you've also thought
[Amit Varma]: about as you know, you've spent decades almost doing the old school thing where you're one
[Amit Varma]: person speaking to many?
[Guest]: I actually thought about it a lot, because I'll give you an example. Whenever I did television,
[Guest]: as an old axiom, you still find it in British television or in American television, that
[Guest]: you speak to the camera as though you're speaking to a person. Yeah, and that whoever is watching
[Guest]: you at the other end, will feel you're talking to them. That like, for instance, our conversation
[Guest]: could have been a non tape recorded conversation, it would have been the same. We are making
[Guest]: no concessions the fact that this is a broadcast. Now, telecasting, I was always taught, always
[Guest]: learned was that like, if you interviewed somebody, you interviewed him like it was
[Guest]: a conversation. There should be no artifice to it. It should be like you were chatting
[Guest]: normally. One of the things that's happened in Indian television is that anchors have
[Guest]: purposely abandoned intimacy. If you go on to one of the more popular English news channels
[Guest]: today, there is no sense in which the anchor is talking to the camera as a viewer. One
[Guest]: indication is the number of times they will say, ladies and gentlemen, viewer in the manner
[Guest]: of a ringmaster at a circus, that you never ever do that in television. Classically, you
[Guest]: still don't do it in television abroad. So oddly enough, mainstream media has become
[Guest]: much more circus like, much more dramatic and much more theatrical, at least mainstream
[Guest]: television, which I think is not only a mistake from the point of view of quality, though
[Guest]: it may well work from the point of view of popularity. Because mainstream media has now
[Guest]: become so theatrical, has become so much like tamasha and drama, people actually crave
[Guest]: something that's much more intimate, that talks to them as though they're real people.
[Guest]: I'll give you an example. For much of my television career, I've been an interviewer.
[Guest]: And one way to do an interview, and I'm sure there are other ways to do it, is as though
[Guest]: you're talking to a person, and the viewer is a fly on the wall, somebody who's heard
[Guest]: the conversation. You can't do that kind of interview now. Now you have to ask hostile
[Guest]: questions, you have to shout a lot, you have to indicate to the viewer what a muscle macho
[Guest]: man you are, etc. There is a much greater consciousness of the audience in mainstream
[Guest]: television media now than there was earlier. In say, YouTube or whatever, if the audience
[Guest]: is recognized, it's recognized by people who think, hey, you and I are both in on the joke,
[Guest]: it's much more sly and it's annoying. There isn't this ringmaster approach. And though
[Guest]: these people all say they're getting huge ratings, I think they're actually driving
[Guest]: people away from this bandwaja, ringmaster style of presenting towards mediums that
[Guest]: are towards media that are much more intimate, where people talk. Radio, for instance, now,
[Guest]: as you said, with all these funny voices and these accents and this forced hilarity, and
[Guest]: this sense of, hey, we're all having fun on this wonderful radio station. I think that
[Guest]: actually started to put people off. They are much happier with somebody who treats them
[Amit Varma]: like adults.
[Amit Varma]: And do you think some of this forced theatricality, so to say, comes from sort of falling into
[Amit Varma]: a trap that let us say that you're in a, you join a TV news channel today, there is a conventional
[Amit Varma]: way of doing things. And you don't want to get away from the convention. And there is
[Amit Varma]: no discovery process where you can try out different things and figure out what works.
[Amit Varma]: And interestingly, on YouTube, on podcasts, there is a natural discovery process, because
[Amit Varma]: anybody, everybody's throwing everything at the wall, and something's taken, niches get
[Amit Varma]: formed, and niches get discovered, which wouldn't otherwise even get discovered in the bigger
[Amit Varma]: places. So, you know, is that a kind of trap that you see?
[Guest]: Absolutely. You look at the younger people, people who've been for three years, four years
[Guest]: in the business on many of these news channels. And they're also saying things halfway through
[Guest]: talking to a guest, you know, do you think the people of India will stand for this?
[Guest]: Our viewers know who's telling the truth. So they started out with this sort of band
[Guest]: bhaja approach. And unfortunately, it will become normal for them.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, and there's sometimes a lag of decades before change happens in any field. I often
[Amit Varma]: talk about, you know, Ignaz Semmelweis, who the mid 19th century doctor who realized that
[Amit Varma]: a lot of deaths in hospitals occurred because people didn't wash their hands. And he wasn't
[Amit Varma]: taken seriously for decades. It took millions of deaths, potentially from that before people
[Amit Varma]: kind of figured it out. And that, of course, had a real human consequence. So one could
[Amit Varma]: argue the human consequence here is sort of unseen in a way. I also want to ask you about
[Amit Varma]: the art of conversation. Because again, it's something that I think about a lot. I taught
[Amit Varma]: a podcasting course at one point where I examined different styles of interviewing. And I found
[Amit Varma]: something you said in your book resonated with me. And I agreed completely, where you were at one
[Amit Varma]: point asked to do a program that was like hard talk. And you were like, No, I don't want to do
[Amit Varma]: something adversarial, I want to have a conversation. And it strikes me that a lot of interviewing
[Amit Varma]: that you see, like you just mentioned, is adversarial is looking for gotcha moments is
[Amit Varma]: looking to put a person in a spot. Like one of the values that I've developed for myself is one,
[Amit Varma]: of course, I don't like to do q&as, I like to do conversations. But the other value is I simply
[Amit Varma]: never interrupt. Because what really gets my goat in interviews that I see online is that the host
[Amit Varma]: is just interrupting all the time without taking any names. And this keeps the conversation at a
[Amit Varma]: shallow level, the guests never really relaxes never gets a chance to go deep. The host is
[Amit Varma]: always thinking about his or her next question rather than actually listening and, you know,
[Amit Varma]: following those kind of rabbit holes. Now you have like, way, way, way more experience than I
[Amit Varma]: have in constructing conversations and in thinking about it. So can you share some of your insights?
[Guest]: Yes, my approach to an interview is probably different for many people in the business.
[Guest]: Lots of people do detailed research before they go in. They are like cross examination lawyers,
[Guest]: they know the answers to the questions before they ask. I do some research, so as not to seem
[Guest]: like an idiot, but not much more than that. My perspective is that of a viewer who doesn't know
[Guest]: very much about the guest. But I am slightly better informed than the viewer. That's it.
[Guest]: Then the rest of it has to be curiosity. Because you assume the viewer has the same level of
[Guest]: curiosity, you put the man at ease, you let him tell a story. And periodically, as you've done
[Guest]: with me, you make him question his assumptions and say, but do you think that really makes sense?
[Guest]: And if the interviewee is honest, he will probably say, you're right, I've thought about this again,
[Guest]: as I have with you in the course of this conversation. I think that is how you get
[Guest]: the most out of the person. There's also a danger, particularly with celebrity interviewers,
[Guest]: that you make the mistake of believing that people watch the show for you. They don't,
[Guest]: they watch the show for your guests. So what you've got to do is get the best out of your guests,
[Guest]: make them feel you really understand the guest, you know what the guest is like. I think all of
[Guest]: that is now forgotten. You have that same, I'm going to get you, I'm going to trap you kind of
[Guest]: moment. And yet, if you sit down, can you tell me in the last 10 years, anybody of consequence who's
[Guest]: ever been trapped in a television interview on Indian TV? It never works. They never managed
[Guest]: to trap anyone. They just wreck the interview. And often it is this, I want to show the audience
[Guest]: what a macho guy or lady I am. I gave it, I don't care. If you do that, which is, I mean, okay,
[Guest]: if you think the whole thing is a narcissistic exercise, but as an interview, it's a disaster.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, I agree with all of that, except I'll add a little nuance to one point, which is that
[Amit Varma]: all the podcasters I follow, I actually, all the interview podcasts, for example, whether it's
[Amit Varma]: Econ Talk by Russ Roberts or Conversations with Tyler by Tyler Carvin, or Sam Harris's great
[Amit Varma]: interview podcast, I don't follow it because of the guests. I take it for granted that they'll
[Amit Varma]: get an interesting guest. I follow them because I'm following their intellectual journeys and
[Amit Varma]: their curiosities. And of course, those are rich and enriching because they are respectful of the
[Amit Varma]: guest and they are not looking for gotcha moments. And they're basically adhering to the principles
[Amit Varma]: that we both kind of spoke about. So to that extent, I think that the personal does become
[Amit Varma]: very important, which kind of brings me to my next question, which is something that I have
[Amit Varma]: kind of wondered and thought about and struggled with at different parts of my past, which is,
[Amit Varma]: what do you do for personal satisfaction? And what do you do? Because it seems like a sensible
[Amit Varma]: thing to do within your career, and it will make you money. So you know, like in your book, when
[Amit Varma]: I follow your journey, I see you doing a lot of shows. And obviously, at one point, it's lucrative
[Amit Varma]: and you're doing all of these shows. But what are those things you've done, which you were really
[Amit Varma]: passionate about? You know, you really, that you look back and you say that even if I hadn't got
[Guest]: paid, I would have done this. Well, I do a lot of writing, for instance, writing I do for ht.com.
[Guest]: The column is very popular. I don't get paid very much for it. I do it because I want to have a
[Guest]: voice. I enjoy having a voice. So much of my writing, if you write books, there's very little
[Guest]: money in books, for instance, but there is a sense of satisfaction. So television on the whole is for
[Guest]: the money, let's be brutal about this. But almost all of the writing is done for love of writing
[Amit Varma]: and saying something rather than making money. So here's my next question about a journalist,
[Amit Varma]: like one of the things that comes out again in your book is that you've got great access. And
[Amit Varma]: a lot of the journalism that one does is built on building access, having people talk to you,
[Amit Varma]: because that's how you get great stories and all of that. How does this access change how you look
[Amit Varma]: at these people? Like, you know, a lot of these people, you speak about what a warm, lovely person,
[Amit Varma]: someone like Bal Thackeray is. So on the one hand, you relate to him in a personal way.
[Amit Varma]: But on the other hand, you relate in a different way to his politics. And there seems to be a kind
[Amit Varma]: of dissonance there. So how does it affect your writing? How does it affect your perspectives?
[Amit Varma]: At some point, do you feel that, you know, this is all just a grand play that is playing out and
[Guest]: you're playing a part in it as well? Well, two or three things. First of all, I think India has
[Guest]: changed. In the era when I had access, I was far from the only person who had access. Journalists
[Guest]: were more respected by the political class. People came and spoke to us. They discussed
[Guest]: things with us. When we had objections to what they were doing, they took us seriously. Nowadays,
[Guest]: you're either a poodle or you're garbage. I mean, nobody really has any respect in the political
[Guest]: class, has any respect for journalists or for our views. When they have to engage with journalists,
[Guest]: very rarely with anybody of consequence come. Instead, they send these sort of moronic
[Guest]: spokespeople onto television to take part in more moronic debates and fight. The real actors
[Guest]: hardly ever come onto television. Once upon a time, they would. I mean, I got Narasimhano,
[Guest]: Gujarat, various people to come to the studio and talk about it. So, there is a difference in the
[Guest]: way people respond to us. Secondly, the price you pay for access usually is that you're supposed to
[Guest]: be kind to the person who has given you this access. That's always true to an extent, but it's
[Guest]: less true than you would think. For instance, I had a great deal of access to Bal Thackeray,
[Guest]: who you mentioned. Yet, almost everything I wrote was against the Shiv Sena. I don't think there's
[Guest]: one initiative they took that I supported. You gave me the example of my saying that
[Guest]: Narasimha Rao was a small-time manipulator. Yet, Narasimha Rao did not deny me access.
[Guest]: I continued to meet him. So, yes, there will always be politicians who will say that since
[Guest]: you've written bad things about me, I don't think I should waste time with you. But most mature
[Guest]: politicians in that era, even if you were hostile to them or whatever, would call you over partly
[Guest]: because they respected you, but mostly because they thought by giving you access and explaining
[Guest]: things, they could change your mind. But in answer to your larger question, all access journalism is
[Guest]: dangerous because there is often an unspoken trade-off, which is in return for the access to
[Guest]: get favorable coverage. So, you have to make it quite clear in the beginning that while you're
[Guest]: quite willing to put across their position sympathetically, you are not willing to put
[Guest]: across the right position or say that you agree with it. So, my next question is a slightly
[Amit Varma]: complicated and rambly one. One, you've written in your book about how so many politicians are,
[Amit Varma]: I mean, all people are creatures of circumstance, but so many politicians as well. You gave the
[Amit Varma]: examples of Naveen Patnaik and Jyotiraditya Sindhiya as people who were on a completely
[Amit Varma]: different track, but because of circumstances, kind of came into politics and surprised everyone
[Amit Varma]: with the personas they adopted and perhaps even the persons they became. Now, it gets me to
[Amit Varma]: thinking about, you know, somebody had raised the question of why are Indian politicians today
[Amit Varma]: so apparently venal when our freedom fighters or our founding group of politicians are independent,
[Amit Varma]: so to say, were such noble people. And my point there was that the incentives were different,
[Amit Varma]: that when those people were fighting for freedom like the Nehru's and the Gandhi's and the Patel's
[Amit Varma]: and all that, there was no power to be had. So, it wasn't lust for power which drove them.
[Amit Varma]: It was a higher set of ideals and therefore, that's the kind of people that they were. Even
[Amit Varma]: if they made mistakes as politicians or mistakes in governing and all of that, they were honest
[Amit Varma]: mistakes made in good faith. They were driven by the right ideals. The incentives have changed
[Amit Varma]: completely today because the state is so incredibly all-powerful and power corrupts,
[Amit Varma]: as the cliche goes. And perhaps this is simplistic, that politics always corrodes character
[Amit Varma]: because you might enter politics having a certain set of principles. But then to get ahead in
[Amit Varma]: politics, you have to adopt a persona. So, the question is, does the persona then become a
[Amit Varma]: person? And the secondary question is that, is there a particular type of politician, a type of
[Amit Varma]: person, almost a sociopath as it were, who is therefore likely to thrive? Like, I'd done a
[Amit Varma]: column on this as well a few years back, where studies had found that sociopaths, and sociopathy
[Amit Varma]: by the way for my listeners is, you know, not an empty pejorative. It's a particular condition of
[Amit Varma]: the brain where a particular part of the brain, I think the amygdala is damaged in a particular way,
[Amit Varma]: so you don't feel empathy for others. And sociopaths are over-represented in, I think it
[Amit Varma]: was bankers, prison convicts, and politicians. And my point was that sociopaths are more likely
[Amit Varma]: to be drawn to politics because they have the characteristics it takes to get ahead. And in
[Amit Varma]: this context, I was struck by something that you said about VP Singh and I'll just quote from that
[Amit Varma]: lovely chapter where you write, quote, the problem with VP Singh was that he was a little like Arvind
[Amit Varma]: Kejriwal is today. Financially upright, soft-spoken, competent, and capable of evoking strong emotions
[Amit Varma]: among his supporters. But he was also a man without any core beliefs, without any long-term
[Amit Varma]: loyalty, except one or two political friends, and without any transparency. Even Advani, who was
[Amit Varma]: vilified by the secular media, was a relatively straight person. If he said he was going to do
[Amit Varma]: something, he usually did it. VP Singh, on the other hand, was capable of such duplicity that
[Amit Varma]: if you asked him what day of the week it was, and he said, Tuesday, the chances were that it was
[Amit Varma]: really Friday, stop quote. And I love this because Kejriwal is exactly like this as well. So that's
[Amit Varma]: a beautiful comparison that is drawn. Now, in the simplistic view that I put forward to you,
[Amit Varma]: it would seem that every politician will inevitably be like this. But your book is
[Amit Varma]: full of slightly richer and more complex characters. So what is your sense one of,
[Amit Varma]: is there a type of person who thrives in politics? And two, how do politicians in your experience
[Amit Varma]: wrestle with these kind of dual imperatives, this conflict between the persona and person as it were?
[Guest]: Gosh, it's a difficult question. I think there are many different kinds of people
[Guest]: who join politics, and they do it for different reasons. We talked about the freedom fighter
[Guest]: generation. They didn't join politics because they thought there was any chance of them ever
[Guest]: getting anything out of it. They joined because they had a mission to free India.
[Guest]: The generation after this believed in a term we laugh at these days, which is nation building.
[Guest]: They believed that they were part of building this great democratic experiment that the rest
[Guest]: of the world said couldn't work. I think in subsequent generations, it gets more and more
[Guest]: difficult. And it depends on which party you're part of. Look at the RSS and the Jamsung.
[Guest]: There was a time before Vajpayee when nobody thought the Jamsung would ever come to office
[Guest]: or would ever come to power. In 1996, Vajpayee became prime minister for 13 days, had to resign
[Guest]: because nobody would touch the BJP and they regarded them untouchable. So what kind of person
[Guest]: joins the BJP or joins the RSS in that situation? It's clearly not a man who wants to get rich
[Guest]: or a man who necessarily wants to be powerful because the chances are that he'll never get near
[Guest]: power. So the answer in my experience is the man who joins in these circumstances is a man who's
[Guest]: ideologically motivated, who disagrees usually with the kind of India that the freedom fighters
[Guest]: and the founding fathers created, who wants to transform India to be more a mirror image of
[Guest]: what Golwalkar or somebody wanted. In many ways, this kind of man is more dangerous. So certainly
[Guest]: worth watching more closely because he believes that the end, which is the transformation of
[Guest]: India, is much more important than the democratic means, which kept them from getting power for 40
[Guest]: years or 50 years. Therefore, he will do whatever is necessary, whatever is required to achieve
[Guest]: that aim and then you're possibly right, it may help to be a sociopath. But that kind of person
[Guest]: therefore doesn't care about norms, doesn't care about other people and just does it. So that's
[Guest]: one kind of person. The second kind of person is the kind of politician you see today. Many of them
[Guest]: are dynasts. These are people who joined politics not because they had any love of politics or any
[Guest]: commitment to people, but because it was the family business. For them, politics is no more than a
[Guest]: business opportunity. People always think it's extraordinary that so many people who joined
[Guest]: the Congress and swore loyalty to secularism are now in the BJP saying absolutely opposite.
[Guest]: But for these people, politics is not really about ideology. It's not really about belief.
[Guest]: It's only about self-advancement, like a businessman who's done very well in the steel
[Guest]: industry, but now sees an opportunity in the computer industry. So he leaves the steel industry
[Guest]: behind and goes off to join the computer industry. That's what they're like. And therefore, in many
[Guest]: ways, you have to take everything they say with a pinch of salt, because they're saying it only
[Guest]: because they believe that's the requirement of the industry they're in. When the industry changes,
[Guest]: their rhetoric changes. So there are different kinds of people who join politics.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, that's fascinating. I'm reminded of Keynes who said, you know, when the facts change,
[Amit Varma]: I change my mind, sir, what do you do? A politician might well say that when my incentives change,
[Amit Varma]: I change my party, sir, what do you do? Absolutely. Shashi Tharoor did a column in
[Guest]: which he said that people who joined a career, say, I'll give you my own example. So you join
[Guest]: HDFC bank, and you realize your better career prospects, a stand chart, you change jobs.
[Guest]: Politics has become a bit like that people just look at career prospects,
[Guest]: there is no sense of ideology of having ever believed in anything.
[Amit Varma]: So that's interesting, because then what that also makes it more likely that the true believers,
[Amit Varma]: as it were, are people who are within the BJP, because they joined the BJP, when
[Amit Varma]: so you know, that could either be a feature or a bug, depending on how you look at it.
[Amit Varma]: My next question goes to a conversation that you report having with Advani about the Babri
[Amit Varma]: Masjid, where in your book, you report at one time, you asked him that, how do you know this
[Amit Varma]: is a birthplace of Ram? How do you know Ram even existed? And so on and so forth. And his answer
[Amit Varma]: is that it doesn't matter what the facts are, it matters what people believe, you know, that faith
[Amit Varma]: is important. And this brings that whole dichotomy of faith versus facts. And this is a larger
[Amit Varma]: dichotomy in today's times. And this is in a sense, is a question to you about both politics
[Amit Varma]: and media, like you must have read Walter Lippmann's classic book on journalism, Public
[Amit Varma]: Opinion, where the first chapter is titled the world outside in the picture in our heads,
[Amit Varma]: where he points out that most people have a construction of the world in their heads,
[Amit Varma]: that cannot correspond exactly to the world, obviously, because the world is so complex, but
[Amit Varma]: which is kind of made up. Now back in the day, when you had a consensus and truth,
[Amit Varma]: you had a mainstream media, everybody got information from the same place,
[Amit Varma]: that picture was very similar. Now the picture can be anything that anybody wants it to be.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore, you know, what Murali Manohar Joshi was doing, inventing history's whole scale,
[Amit Varma]: when he was in the HRD ministry, is not something that is so unusual. It is something that
[Amit Varma]: would be successful, perhaps was successful, will be successful. And just taking that thought
[Amit Varma]: forward, it also strikes me that this is something that the ruling dispensation realizes,
[Amit Varma]: that what matters is constructing narrative. Governance doesn't really matter so much,
[Amit Varma]: one because Indian people have just become so apathetic and resigned to bad governance,
[Amit Varma]: but also because you can always build a narrative about anything. And these are really two different
[Amit Varma]: skill sets. One is a skill set of winning elections by pushing narratives. And the other
[Amit Varma]: is a skill set of governing wealth. And they seem to me to be two totally different skill sets,
[Amit Varma]: which have nothing to do with each other. So a party that excels at the one, you shouldn't
[Amit Varma]: expect them necessarily to excel at the other or be outraged when they don't. But in a larger sense,
[Amit Varma]: how does this make you feel? Because all your life as a journalist, as a newscaster,
[Amit Varma]: it's in a sense, I mean, I know I'm stating it a bit idealistically, but it's in the pursuit of
[Amit Varma]: truth. It's at least in the recognition that there is a truth. While in modern times,
[Amit Varma]: there are just different narratives. How do you feel about this?
[Guest]: Well, I think in many ways, Advani with his, it doesn't matter what the truth is,
[Guest]: it's what people believe the truth is, was ahead of his time, because you watch
[Guest]: Kelly and Conway and all these other Republicans on television now, alternative facts, which is
[Guest]: what Advani was presenting us without knowing the term. But I'll give you three examples from
[Guest]: social media and the government over the last three days. One is the government got up in
[Guest]: parliament and said, there have been no oxygen deaths in India during the pandemic. Two, it
[Guest]: got up and said, there has been no shortage of vaccines. And three, throughout social media,
[Guest]: the glove puppets of the ruling establishment picked up a story about amnesty and what it
[Guest]: said about the Pegasus revelations, twisted its meaning and ran it throughout social media saying
[Guest]: that amnesty has denied the truth of the Pegasus report, has said we never said these Pegasus
[Guest]: phones were hacked. Now, all three are utter and complete lies. All three got wide circulation,
[Guest]: at least in the case of the first two, because they came from people you don't normally expect
[Guest]: to lie, ministers in the government of India. But as you say, the sad reality is that they have
[Guest]: built a narrative over what if you were kind, you could call alternative facts, but if you were
[Guest]: brutal, you would call lies. And that ultimately is how governance functions today. You don't let
[Guest]: the truth ever get you down. You invent your narrative, you stick with your narrative,
[Guest]: you manipulate social media to promote that narrative, and you browbeat traditional media
[Guest]: to also carry that narrative. If they don't carry that narrative, they will say you're being unfair
[Guest]: to us. Why aren't you carrying our side of the story? And you say, but your side of the story
[Guest]: is a lie. So what? You have to be fair to us. That's what we've been reduced to.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I'm reminded of that story of if a journalist is in a room and one person tells
[Amit Varma]: him it's raining and the other person says it's not raining, his job is not to report both. His
[Amit Varma]: job is to go to the window and look outside. Yeah. And I don't know if you've read this book
[Amit Varma]: by Harry Frankfurt called On Bullshit. No, I haven't. Yeah. So Harry Frankfurt is a philosopher.
[Amit Varma]: I think he wrote this essay in the mid 80s and it came out as a book in the early 2000s. And he
[Amit Varma]: uses this phrase bullshit in a particular way. He says that many politicians aren't lying.
[Amit Varma]: They are bullshitting. And the difference is that a lie acknowledges that there is a truth
[Amit Varma]: and that, you know, it is not the truth. But when it comes to bullshitting, people don't care about
[Amit Varma]: the truth. It doesn't matter. They'll just say whatever. It may be true sometimes accidentally.
[Amit Varma]: It may not be true sometimes. It doesn't matter. They're just bullshitting, going with the
[Amit Varma]: narrative. I think Trump did this a hell of a lot. I see a lot of this coming from this
[Amit Varma]: dispensation. In fact, these seem to me to be examples of just bullshitting that there was no
[Guest]: oxygen shortage. The government minister saying there was no vaccine shortage is more than
[Guest]: bullshitting. It's a lie. It's a lie. It's an answer to a specific question to tell a lie
[Guest]: that is easily demonstrably disprovable that everybody knows that there was a vaccine shortage.
[Guest]: Everybody can get the figures. But the guy says it because he can. He can get away in
[Amit Varma]: today's environment to telling a lie. No, I won't argue this particular example.
[Amit Varma]: But Frankfurt's distinction was. No, I think it's a good distinction.
[Guest]: I think it's a good distinction. We ultimately nowadays do politics by bullshit.
[Guest]: These guys just make it up all along and never let the facts get in the way.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, exactly. And we see a lot of this in social media as well. So let's kind of talk about
[Amit Varma]: social media because I see two sort of disconcerting trends in social media apart from
[Amit Varma]: the polarization of the discourse and all of that. I see two sort of ways in which social media can
[Amit Varma]: turn a user into a different person. And one is and this is again, perhaps from the vocal minority
[Amit Varma]: and the silent majority is not like this. But from a lot of people, you see a rudeness which
[Amit Varma]: you would not otherwise see in traditional media, a classic form of that being the quote tweet.
[Amit Varma]: Like if you and I were having a disagreement and I said something you thought was stupid,
[Amit Varma]: you would not immediately in my presence turn to a third person and say, oh, look,
[Amit Varma]: Amit is such a fool. Amit is an idiot, you know, but this happens all the time on Twitter.
[Amit Varma]: And it's almost become a reflexive thing that you're passing judgment on others to show your
[Amit Varma]: own virtue. Because every time you diss someone, you're basically saying something about yourself
[Amit Varma]: as well. You're saying I am better than this. I am at a higher moral ground or whatever
[Amit Varma]: intellectual ground to pass judgment on this person. And this, it seems to me can have a
[Amit Varma]: corrosive aspect on a person's character, even in the real world. And the other aspect is that
[Amit Varma]: people adopt certainty much sooner. Like, you know, if social media had been around when I was
[Amit Varma]: in my teens or early 20s, it would have been a disaster because one does so many stupid things,
[Amit Varma]: one says so many stupid things. But as you go through life, you learn, you become a better
[Amit Varma]: person, you change your views. I think social media often what happens is if you're 19,
[Amit Varma]: you know, you find your echo chamber online, you get comfort from being part of an ideological
[Amit Varma]: tribe, you put out tweets, you say whatever. And after that, you're jostling for position within
[Amit Varma]: that tribe by expressing your purity. I think then having taken hardened stance, you then find
[Amit Varma]: yourself doubling down, which is a human tendency. And you become more and more hardened, which
[Amit Varma]: otherwise you might not have, if not for these imperatives of posturing and seeking validation
[Amit Varma]: and all of that. Is this stuff that you've thought about? I mean, I know you've been at the receiving
[Amit Varma]: end of trolling and rudeness and all of that as well yourself. And at the same time, you know,
[Amit Varma]: you have a following of your own, you use social media, a fair bit, I see you on Twitter. So,
[Guest]: what are your thoughts on this? I think some of it is the tyranny
[Guest]: or the advantage of distance. I'll give you a simple example. If you watch any television show,
[Guest]: people are very rude to each other. Most shows degenerate into fights or abuse or whatever.
[Guest]: Now, if you were to take the guests on that same show, and you were to put them in a television
[Guest]: studio, they're always much more civilized. Here they're in windows, they're talking alone
[Guest]: into a camera or into a computer, they don't actually see the other person. So, they feel
[Guest]: they can get away with treating that person with less respect, being much ruder, being much more
[Guest]: offensive than they would be. You take that forward into social media, where not only do
[Guest]: you have the disadvantage, if I'm talking to you, I'm obliged to be polite, I mean, it's human
[Guest]: nature. If I'm tweeting to you from a great distance, I can say what I like. So, I think
[Guest]: that if the impersonal nature of communication always leads to an increase in rudeness,
[Guest]: then there are all the factors you talk about, which is that the great thing about social media
[Guest]: is that it provides a level playing field. Somebody like say the Prime Minister can tweet
[Guest]: something, and you can tweet a response to him. You may have millions of followers, you may have
[Guest]: 5,000, but at least when the tweets appear, they appear side by side. So, there is that illusion,
[Guest]: that sense of equality that you too can have your say. Now, that's incredibly empowering in some
[Guest]: ways. But also, I think it allows people to be more abusive than they otherwise would be. Many
[Guest]: of the people say who abuse Rahul Gandhi. If they were next to Rahul Gandhi, they would not do this,
[Guest]: but they feel powerful. They feel you can say to him, you're a papu, you count for nothing, etc.
[Guest]: So, social media strengthens, gives a sort of Dutch courage to people who want to be negative,
[Guest]: allows them to do something. Also, and you made that point about social media mobs,
[Guest]: that if you're in it from an early age, you fall in with one lot, and then you double down
[Guest]: on your things. Often, social media makes you feel more powerful than you are as an individual,
[Guest]: because you feel you're part of something greater. Say, you're part of a Congress mob
[Guest]: that attacks anybody who says anything bad about Rahul Gandhi, or you're part of a Sanghi mob that
[Guest]: does it. And then add to that the control rooms, the glove puppets, the two rupee walas, who are
[Guest]: sent in there basically to lower the tone of discourse, to make it abusive, to make it rude.
[Guest]: Once the debate takes on that tenor, when you join, you tend to follow that tenor.
[Guest]: So, I think it's a combination of many, many factors.
[Amit Varma]: It reminds me of this experiment that was carried out in the US, where basically people exiting a
[Amit Varma]: sports arena were sent into a tent or whatever, and there's a puppet there of a sports star who
[Amit Varma]: was at that time unpopular with the franchise, and they could say whatever they wanted, went as it
[Amit Varma]: were. And the whole deal was that this person would go in and he would shout and scream or
[Amit Varma]: abuse or say whatever. And then from behind the puppet, the actual sports star would emerge.
[Amit Varma]: So, I'll actually look, I don't think there are video clips of it. I'll look for them,
[Amit Varma]: because it's just fascinating. And it's a fascinating experiment of sort of how that
[Amit Varma]: kind of works. You know, your book is, I love reading it so much. And I won't ask you more
[Amit Varma]: questions on the politics and the media aspects of it. I suggest everyone should just go out and
[Amit Varma]: read that. But I'll end with some general questions. And one of those is kind of an observation as well,
[Amit Varma]: really, that I wanted to make because one of the things that I was delighted by when I started
[Amit Varma]: reading this book was how lol funny it was to use millennial lingo, which honestly, I have to say,
[Amit Varma]: I've been reading it for many, many years, I did not expect it to be this funny, like there were
[Guest]: chapter titles, which just made me laugh out loud, like, you know, chapter titles are my
[Guest]: wife's work, I can't take the credit for them. She edited the book, and she wrote all the chapter titles.
[Amit Varma]: Well, they're fantastic, but they come from your chapters, which you did, right? So you know,
[Amit Varma]: little things like Pondith here, but I cannot, which is your colleague in the Calcutta office
[Amit Varma]: calling up the BBC. And but the funniest part, which I just I burst out laughing and alarmed
[Amit Varma]: the people around me was Atlas Bihar vampire, where HD in Bhopal carried a headline, which was
[Amit Varma]: Atlas Bihar vampire comes to Bhopal. And you investigated further and found out that it was
[Amit Varma]: somebody using a spellchecker and they had meant Atal Bihari Vajpayee comes to Bhopal, but it became
[Amit Varma]: Atlas Bihar vampire, which is just hilarious. Well, for that, for the man in question,
[Guest]: it happened on a day when I was entering the Hindustan Times and Shobhana Bharatia,
[Guest]: who is the owner is the owner of the Hindustan Times, were both in town. And we both woke up
[Guest]: in the morning, read this and went ballistic. If he had done it on some other day, you'd have got
[Amit Varma]: away with it. It's just hilarious. Yeah, I mean, Bhopal readers would have been like,
[Amit Varma]: what the fuck? So that is something I really enjoyed. My next question is this, that what
[Amit Varma]: drives you now? You know, you've been in journalism for so many decades, you're still doing new things,
[Amit Varma]: you're experimenting with new things, a lot of your thoughts about the intimacy of the medium,
[Amit Varma]: about the nature of how people consume media have changed, are extremely spot on from where I'm
[Amit Varma]: sitting. So what drives you like, you know, what are the things that we can expect from you over
[Amit Varma]: the next 10 years? And in general, like you've, you've shared, you know, brief snippets of what
[Amit Varma]: your philosophy towards life is like, you know, taking happiness in the small things, and so on
[Amit Varma]: and so forth. But what is it that really keeps you going keeps you excited at a personal level?
[Guest]: I don't know, you know, it's a very difficult question to answer, though, you use the word
[Guest]: serendipity for a lot of my career. So much of life has just happened to me, there's never been
[Guest]: a grand design, never a desire to do something. I've done things that haven't worked out, because
[Guest]: they seem the right thing to do at the time. I joined NewsX, because I edited a newspaper,
[Guest]: so it seemed right to now try and run a television channel when that was a fiasco.
[Guest]: So whenever I've tried to do something that seems like the right thing to do,
[Guest]: it has almost never worked out. So I've just let life pass me by. I have in the last few years,
[Guest]: taken much more interest in food, which I think is a growing area. Apart from Easy Diner,
[Guest]: I'm also chairman of a company called Culinary Culture, which is going to rate restaurants
[Guest]: and courage chefs that had really got going. And then the pandemic happened with a bit of
[Guest]: luck that'll end and we'll go on with that. That takes up a fair amount of my time.
[Guest]: I like doing political writing, I do it. I've been less keen on television over the last year or so.
[Guest]: I mean, I do it because the only kind of, I have no interest in anchoring debates. So the only kind
[Guest]: of television I could do would be an interview show, which I am happy to do. But during the
[Guest]: pandemic, this was impossible because you couldn't meet people face to face. And there's the other
[Guest]: problem which we will have to reconcile ourselves to, which is that nobody in a position of great
[Guest]: authority in the government will give me an interview. The way it now works is that if you're
[Guest]: Rajnath Singh or somebody with an independent stature of your own or Gadkari, you decide who
[Guest]: you give interviews to. But almost everybody else has to refer all interview requests to the Prime
[Guest]: Minister's office. And I don't think the Prime Minister is too high in mind to get more, but the
[Guest]: people lower down take the line that if the person is not one of us, then he shouldn't be given any
[Guest]: access. So you end up therefore doing interview shows with opposition members, with people who
[Guest]: are not in politics. I mean, I did it for a while, but it's frustrating. And it got even more
[Guest]: frustrating because I did say an interview with Jan Sinha when he was Civil Aviation Minister,
[Guest]: he was very good. I had an interview with Alphonse when he was Tourism Minister and he spoke well.
[Guest]: They were the two ministers who were dropped immediately when things went on. So the people
[Guest]: who are willing to talk to you, the people who are willing to express their point of view,
[Guest]: are the people who are out of sync anyway, and probably won't last. If I wanted, say,
[Guest]: to interview Nirmala Sitharaman, for instance, there's no chance I would ever get that interview.
[Guest]: If I went to Amit Shah's house to ask for an interview, I'd probably be shot on sight. No,
[Guest]: I'm exaggerating, but I would certainly be frog-marshed out of the building. So there is no
[Guest]: way you can get access into this government. And it's frustrating for an interviewer if you're
[Guest]: doing interviews with people who matter, if the people who run this country close themselves to
[Guest]: you. The Prime Minister has not given a single interview, as far as I know, apart from a few
[Guest]: things to a few selected media people on areas where the questions have been pre-arranged or
[Guest]: whatever. He's not attended a single press conference. So there is no tradition in this
[Guest]: government of openness, of being willing to answer questions. So that is the problem with doing an
[Guest]: interview show. If I can find a way of getting around that, then I'd love to do an interview
[Guest]: show. And I have spoken to channels who are interested in doing that. I love writing,
[Guest]: so I continue to write, though it doesn't necessarily make me much money, but I think
[Guest]: keeps me alive. There's also a sense that when you're 65, which I am now, you've had your say,
[Guest]: you've had your turn. There are newer people coming up who want to be on television, who want
[Guest]: to run newspapers, etc. And there's nothing more irritating or annoying than an old guy who's had
[Guest]: his say but keeps hanging on because he can't find anything else to do. So I've tried very hard and
[Guest]: as gracefully as possible to move out of the way. And now it's not just the next generation,
[Guest]: several generations below me have come of age for them to appear. So on the whole, I want to now do,
[Guest]: I mean, I've worked fairly hard most of my life. I want to do the things I enjoy,
[Guest]: and with a bit of luck, do enough to keep body and soul together and make enough money to survive.
[Amit Varma]: So a digressive question, because you just mentioned food, and I realized that I have
[Amit Varma]: to ask you at least one question about food writing. Otherwise, what is the show even?
[Amit Varma]: And this is something I've explored with other sort of food writers who've come on my show earlier,
[Amit Varma]: like Shubhana Rayan and Nandita Iyer and so on, which is that when you write about food,
[Amit Varma]: initially, one might think that, oh, I like movies, let me write a film review or oh,
[Amit Varma]: I like food, let me write a restaurant review. And one may start like that. But when it becomes
[Amit Varma]: a vocation, when you continue doing it, and you go deeper and deeper, one does your appreciation
[Amit Varma]: of the food increase that much? Like, are you that much more mindful about everything that
[Amit Varma]: you're eating and you're thinking about it in different ways that you otherwise would not have?
[Amit Varma]: And is there then a larger lesson in it, perhaps for journalists, that the best way to increase
[Amit Varma]: your mindfulness about something or your appreciation of something or your knowledge
[Guest]: of something is to force yourself to write about it? I think that's true. I think I don't I mean,
[Guest]: I like food and I've learned much more. I've been doing this column now, I think next year will be
[Guest]: 20 years. So I've been in this column for a very long time. And obviously, I know much more about
[Guest]: food when I started than I did when I started out writing this column. And as time goes on,
[Guest]: you learn more and you realize the things you've written earlier were wrong, which is always a very
[Guest]: humbling experience. But frankly, I've now lost interest in writing about restaurants or writing
[Guest]: about food that's good. I'm more fascinated by the other aspects of food. My column this week,
[Guest]: for instance, is on biryani. Now, biryani is a huge, huge craze in India, despite many efforts
[Guest]: on the part of the powers that be to indicate that khichdi is a more appropriate subject for
[Guest]: us to learn. But still, India loves biryani, no matter how you vote. Now, because biryani
[Guest]: has become such a craze, there's a lot of misinformation. There's this argument, which
[Guest]: I believed for a long time, that biryani, which I didn't believe, the argument that biryani came
[Guest]: from Iran, which is nonsense, it was invented in India. We think it was invented around the
[Guest]: time of Shah Jahan, or perhaps Jahangir. But because something was invented at the time of
[Guest]: Jahangir, doesn't mean that Jahangir necessarily ate it. Just because we are having this conversation
[Guest]: at the time of Narendra Modi, that doesn't necessarily mean he's watching. So
[Guest]: So he is watching, though we know that now. Yeah, that's one good thing in India,
[Guest]: you're never alone, they're always watching. But more seriously, I mean, just because something
[Guest]: was created during a period, doesn't mean it's necessarily regal or royal. And the whole mythology
[Guest]: has been built up around biryani, saying it was a court dish and all of that. In fact, the more
[Guest]: I've researched, my research shows me things I'd never guessed about and how I was wrong before.
[Guest]: All the evidence is that the emperors ate yakhni pulao, which is a dish that came from Iran,
[Guest]: and is a more delicate dish, more difficult to do. Biryani was made in these large vessels
[Guest]: to feed everybody else. So it was a dish for the masses. It was never really a royal dish,
[Guest]: despite the mythology we have now. So doing that story, talking to historians, talking to people
[Guest]: who read the original text, trying to figure out from somebody, for instance, in Lucknow, the biryani,
[Guest]: what we call biryani, the chefs insist on calling a pulao. So in what sense is the Lucknow biryani
[Guest]: a pulao? What sense is it not? I actually enjoy doing stuff like that, which goes beyond saying
[Guest]: a Lucknow biryani is the best or whatever. And I think the only way you can still enjoy writing a
[Guest]: column like that is if you change the focus from simple, I love, it's great and take a pumpkin,
[Guest]: slice it into four, and that's a great way of making it. If you look at the other aspects of food.
[Amit Varma]: Illuminating. And this reminds me of a poem by Vijay Sheshadri, where he talks about, quote,
[Amit Varma]: unquote, the mountain at the end of the universe. And the philosophical question there is that
[Amit Varma]: if the whole universe ends, and there is just a mountain remaining, is it really a mountain?
[Amit Varma]: What is it really? Like, what is it a mountain in comparison to, for example? And the same thing
[Amit Varma]: could be said about a dish of rice at the end of the universe. Is it a biryani or a pulao?
[Guest]: Or is it just a dish of rice?
[Amit Varma]: Is it just a dish of rice? And what is rice even? So my penultimate question to you,
[Amit Varma]: and it's a two part question, I guess, that you've just written this great book where you've looked
[Amit Varma]: back, not just on your own life, but also on Indian politics, Indian media, all of that. It's
[Amit Varma]: a very rich book. If I ask you to look forward now, and let's say, look forward to maybe 10
[Amit Varma]: years from now, what gives you hope and what gives you despair about the sort of direction
[Amit Varma]: we are moving in and about the possibilities that lie ahead of us?
[Guest]: I believe, for better or for worse, that the Prime Minister's greatest achievement
[Guest]: is that he's done what people considered impossible. He's weaponized Hinduism. It's
[Guest]: easy enough to weaponize a minority and to make them feel they're discriminated against and they
[Guest]: have to vote. It's almost impossible, I would have thought, to take what, 85% of the population
[Guest]: and make them feel that they're being discriminated against and attacked by the
[Guest]: other 40% or 15%. But he's pulled it off. There are Hindus who feel that they're,
[Guest]: what's the term, second class citizens in their own country, that they're under constant attacks
[Guest]: from jihadis, that the jihadis are coming and taking their women away from them with love jihad.
[Guest]: And this whole mythology has been built up. Now, you and I may laugh about this mythology,
[Guest]: but what it does is that people now vote for the BJP and for this government, not because of what
[Guest]: it does, but because of what it is, which means that till now, the Prime Minister has been
[Guest]: moralist, performance-proof. Even if demonetization happens and it's a complete disaster,
[Guest]: he's okay. In the first wave, the lockdowns were a complete disaster, but research by some
[Guest]: psychologists has shown in Bihar that even the migrants who were displaced went and voted for
[Guest]: the BJP. So, so far, it hasn't mattered so much. I don't know if the COVID deaths and the terrible
[Guest]: mishandling of the second wave will make a difference, but you can only carry on what
[Guest]: is ultimately done where we're all pious about Mayawati and Mulayam. What the BJP is now doing
[Guest]: is the ultimate in identity politics. But experience has shown us that identity politics cannot last
[Guest]: forever. So while there is an absence at the moment of a clear alternative, I think things
[Guest]: could change in the next two years or three years. Certainly, maybe not enough to defeat the BJP,
[Guest]: but enough to weaken it. If it weakens it enough, it has to form a coalition. Then Mr. Modi is not
[Guest]: quite the titan he seems at the moment. So if you work on that assumption, then the India that he
[Guest]: has created may not survive for that long. You may have an India with a more vibrant politics
[Guest]: rather than a unipolar politics that revolves only around the BJP. And you may have other regimes and
[Guest]: other politicians who are willing to talk to the media, who are willing to give more access,
[Guest]: that another spirit of give and take is introduced between the media and the rest of the country.
[Guest]: If that does happen, if politicians are willing to talk to us, then I think we are going to be
[Guest]: in the next five, six years into a different India. There's also another factor that all of
[Guest]: this Muslim bashing is based on the assumption that Muslims will sit there and take it.
[Guest]: And so far that assumption has been right, nothing's happened. But will that happen indefinitely?
[Guest]: Will people just continue to have their children abused at school, continue to be made to feel
[Guest]: that they're traitors to their own country, the country that families are given their lives for?
[Guest]: I don't think they will. So if this kind of divisive politics continues,
[Guest]: then I think we're in for quite a lot of trouble in India on the communal front. And ironically,
[Guest]: all of this is self-fulfilling. If, say, young Muslims who feel discriminated against or
[Guest]: unemployable resort to any kind of violence, this is taken to the Hindu majority and said,
[Guest]: here, we told you these guys were jihadis, now here is proof. So I think that unless things
[Guest]: change, we are in a very dangerous phase when it comes to the fragile communal balance in India.
[Guest]: So that is something that concerns me about the next 10 years. I'm also very concerned
[Guest]: about the economy. I mean, one of the things we were proud of in the Manmohan Singh era
[Guest]: was that India-Pakistan hyphenation had ended. It was now India-China. Nobody bothers to even
[Guest]: talk about us in the same breath as China. We are back to being India-Pakistan, at least largely
[Guest]: because the political establishment has not only screwed up the economy, it has been obsessive
[Guest]: in its emphasis on Pakistan. We used to say once upon a time that India is top of the mind for
[Guest]: every Pakistani, but for Indians, who even thinks about it, we hardly even think about it. Not true
[Guest]: any longer. Politicians think about it every day. I think that's also a very dangerous phase.
[Guest]: If the economy does not deliver, there are many, many people joining the job market. They will not
[Guest]: get jobs. There will be a huge amount of unrest and a huge amount of frustration. So what are
[Guest]: the solutions required? I think, one, you need some kind of more tolerant, more inclusive regime.
[Guest]: That may not be possible with the current cast of characters, but perhaps those circumstances
[Guest]: will change. You also need somebody who understands the economy, knows how to manage it.
[Guest]: I mean, the distinguishing factor of this government's economic management has been
[Guest]: mediocrity. Nobody says that they're geniuses, they're going to do things. I hope that changes
[Guest]: very quickly because we've gone in seven years from being the country the world looks at and
[Guest]: wonders what will happen to being the country the world worries about. There's a huge uproar in India
[Guest]: at the moment because the economists just called India the sick man of Asia, which is the kind of
[Guest]: thing they used to say about India in the 60s. But I think we risk going back to those days,
[Guest]: and that worries me greatly. So there is some reason for hope, but there are many,
[Amit Varma]: many reasons for concern. Yeah, wise words. And you know, that old cliche,
[Amit Varma]: I think Harold Wilson, it was said that, you know, a week is a long time in politics.
[Amit Varma]: So it's actually unfair to ask anyone a question about what politics could look like 10 years from
[Amit Varma]: now, because things change so fast. I mean, just looking at America, and I'm thinking aloud in 2004
[Amit Varma]: when Bush beat Kerry, who would have thought that your next president is going to be a guy
[Amit Varma]: whose surname rhymes with Osama and whose middle name is Hussein? Or who would have thought when,
[Amit Varma]: you know, Obama won for the second time, the next president is going to be Donald Trump.
[Guest]: So crazy things happen. So all political predictions are a high risk business.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, exactly. So my final question, and this is, again, something that's particular to the show,
[Amit Varma]: because people like to read so much, and they're always looking for book recommendations,
[Amit Varma]: without any bar on subject or genre or whatever. You know, if there are four or five books or
[Amit Varma]: whatever number is easy to come up with you on the spur of the moment, which you want to share
[Amit Varma]: with the world, you feel that, hey, these are books everyone should read. Or if there are books
[Amit Varma]: that you feel shaped you and change the way you look at the world, you know, give us some
[Guest]: recommendations. Christ, it's difficult. I'm trying to think. Well, fiction, I've quoted from it. So
[Guest]: I'll quote from it again. I think in many ways, it's the perfect novel. I think everyone should
[Guest]: read The Great Catchment. Because it's ostensibly a simple story, but there's so many little pearls
[Guest]: of wisdom, like the lines I quoted earlier in the show. I think everyone should read that.
[Guest]: Thinking. I think anyone who lives in Mumbai should read Sacred Games. I think it's still
[Guest]: the definitive Mumbai novel. I wouldn't be too worried about the television adaptation,
[Guest]: the first one was good, the second one was rubbish. But just read the book. I think the
[Guest]: book is worth reading. If you're interested in the media, which I think many of us are,
[Guest]: particularly the history of the media, to understand how we got here, read The Powers
[Guest]: That Be by David Halberstam. That came out in the 1980s. But it tells you how CBS became what it is,
[Guest]: how Time magazine became what it is. It talks, The Washington Post, it talks about great media
[Guest]: organizations and what it takes to found them or to become them. Books about India are pretty much
[Guest]: anything by Ram Goa. I don't think I've ever read anything Ram has written and not felt
[Guest]: enriched at the end of time. And both of Nandan Nirakani's books, I think they're both interesting.
[Guest]: The first one is even better than the second, but both of them deal with stuff at the level of ideas,
[Guest]: which I think is unusual in India. And it sustains your interest. And I think Shashi Tharoor's book
[Guest]: on Empire. I can't remember what it was called, what the British did to us in India,
[Guest]: was Inglourious Empire, something like that. Please read that. I think it's very important
[Guest]: for every Indian to know what the British actually did for us and what we should be upset about.
[Guest]: And yet, as we all know, we gained also, but we gained at enormous cost. Big enough list?
[Amit Varma]: That's a big enough list to start with. Maybe some other time if you're on the show,
[Amit Varma]: you can come better prepared with more books. I'll think of it. This was a curveball.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah. Veer, thank you so much for coming on the show, for sharing your insights,
[Amit Varma]: for giving me your time and for writing this wonderful book, which made me laugh so much
[Guest]: and which also taught me so much. Thank you so much.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you. It has been a real pleasure and a real joy. Thank you for inviting me.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you.